The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Notorious Impostor and Diego Redivivus, by 
Elkanah Settle

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Notorious Impostor and Diego Redivivus

Author: Elkanah Settle

Editor: Spiro Peterson

Release Date: September 23, 2011 [EBook #37517]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTORIOUS IMPOSTOR, DIEGO REDIVIVUS ***




Produced by David Starner and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






THE AUGUSTAN REPRINT SOCIETY


ELKANAH SETTLE
THE NOTORIOUS IMPOSTOR
(1692)

DIEGO REDIVIVUS
(1692)


Introduction by
Spiro Peterson


Publication Number 68


Los Angeles
William Andrews Clark Memorial Library
University of California




GENERAL EDITORS

  RICHARD C. BOYS, _University of Michigan_
  RALPH COHEN, _University of California, Los Angeles_
  VINTON A. DEARING, _University of California, Los Angeles_
  LAWRENCE CLARK POWELL, _Clark Memorial Library_


ASSISTANT EDITOR

  W. EARL BRITTON, _University of Michigan_


ADVISORY EDITORS

  EMMETT L. AVERY, _State College of Washington_
  BENJAMIN BOYCE, _Duke University_
  LOUIS BREDVOLD, _University of Michigan_
  JOHN BUTT, KING'S COLLEGE, _University of Durham_
  JAMES L. CLIFFORD, _Columbia University_
  ARTHUR FRIEDMAN, _University of Chicago_
  LOUIS A. LANDA, _Princeton University_
  SAMUEL H. MONK, _University of Minnesota_
  ERNEST C. MOSSNER, _University of Texas_
  JAMES SUTHERLAND, _University College, London_
  H. T. SWEDENBERG, JR., _University of California, Los Angeles_


CORRESPONDING SECRETARY

  EDNA C. DAVIS, _Clark Memorial Library_




INTRODUCTION


The great English novel of the eighteenth century was developed out of
the long established traditions in the essay, letter, religious
treatise, biography and personal memoir. Although this influence has
been generally acknowledged, the critical investigation of its exact
nature has often been hampered by the lack of readily available texts.
Especially is this true of the criminal biographies written in the late
seventeenth century. The reprinting of Elkanah Settle's _The Notorious
Impostor_ (Part One) and the anonymous _Diego Redivivus_ is thus
justified as providing the means for the further study of the early
fiction-writer's techniques. Published In 1692, the two pamphlets
belong to a group of five closely-related narratives dealing with a
real criminal named William Morrell. In the probable order of their
publication, these were _Diego Redivivus_, _The Notorious Impostor_
(Part One), _The Second Part of the Notorious Impostor_, "_William
Morrell's_ Epitaph" in _The Gentleman's Journal_, and _The Compleat
Memoirs of the Life of that Notorious Impostor Will. Morrell_. The
different accounts forcefully demonstrate how criminal fiction allied
itself with both biography and the picaresque. In addition, _The
Notorious Impostor_ serves as a representative work by Elkanah Settle
whose criminal biographies have never received the attention they
deserve.[1]

The combination of fact and fiction in the William Morrell narratives
had been tried earlier in Settle's first known criminal biography, _The
Life and Death of Major Clancie, the Grandest Cheat of this Age_
(1680). Like Bunyan's _Mr. Badman_, advertised in the same issue of
_The Term Catalogues_ (I, 382), _Major Clancie_ purports to narrate
"Real matter of Fact." Thus, in the background, significant historical
events, from the Irish Rebellion to the Great Fire, are being enacted.
Important English worthies--Lord Ormonde, Bishop Compton, Charles
II--become entangled in the villainies of the Major, an actual Irish
criminal. None of this historical backdrop is to be found, however, in
_The Notorious Impostor_; and the characters here, although Sir William
Walters and Humphrey Wickham were well-known local personages, are not
historically eminent. The picaresque in _Major Clancie_, too, is more
readily identifiable than in _The Notorious Impostor_. For, contrary to
its stated aim, the biography of Clancie is more fiction than fact.
Anthony Wood, noting the fictional elaborations, remarked: "Several
stories in this book which belong to other persons are fathered on the
said major; who, as I remember, was in Oxon in the plague year 1665
when the king and the queen kept their respective courts there."[2]
Wood then contributes a few of his own pungent stories about the Major,
which have no counterparts in Settle's narrative. Where the two writers
provide parallel accounts, the "fiction" appears to be based on a
substratum of truth surviving in anecdotes. Settle's verisimilitude had
an effect upon Theophilus Lucas's _Memoirs of the Lives, Intrigues, and
Comical Adventures of the Most Famous Gamesters and Celebrated
Sharpers_ (1714), which begins with a condensed version of _The Life
and Death of Major Clancie_.[3] Lucas presents his account as if it
were a true memoir.


_The Notorious Impostor_ was to experience a similar acceptance as a
memoir. All modern biographical accounts of its villain-hero, William
Morrell,[4] are based on the two separate parts of _The Notorious
Impostor_ or _The Compleat Memoirs_. On January 3, 1692, he had died, a
criminal at large; and the strange circumstances of his death became
the talk of London. While the event was still a sensation, the
bookseller Abel Roper rushed his "last will and testament" lives into
print. The first to appear was _Diego Redivivus_, reprinted here from
the rare copy at the William Andrews Clark Memorial Library. Evidence
for the publication of _Diego Redivivus_ before _The Notorious
Impostor_ is fairly conclusive. _The Registers of the Worshipful
Company of Stationers_ (III, 397) enters _Diego Redivivus_, on behalf
of Abel Roper, for January 12, 1692, and _The Term Catalogues_ (II,
392) advertises _The Notorious Impostor_ in the quarterly issue
published in February, but Anthony Wood (III, 384) states that he
bought his copy of the latter "in the beginning of March." A comparison
of the two texts, moreover, supports this order of the publication.

Events in _Diego Redivivus_, as in a news story, have greater
immediacy. Morrell's death, the title asserts, took place the third
of "this instant January." The specific detail of _Diego_ (p. 2:
"about a fortnight before _Christmas_") is paralleled by the general
statement of _The Notorious Impostor_ (p. 30: "Some few days before
_Christmas_"). Although its title-page promises a "Full Relation" of
Morrell's cheats, _Diego Redivivus_ presents only the final "will"
episode, whereas _The Notorious Impostor_ ranges over the whole
criminal career. Both narratives have in common the long will and
codicil, except that _The Notorious Impostor_ (p. 34) drastically
shortens the Latin passage which, in _Diego Redivivus_ (p. 10),
states that the will had been probated. Even more conclusive evidence
may be found in comparing the dates of the final events in the two
accounts. _Diego Redivivus_, licensed on January 12, stops short with
the humble burial of Morrell on January 13. Considerably later,
certainly, must be the occurrence described in the Postscript of _The
Notorious Impostor_: the nurse's and assistants' recollection that
Morrell was laughing to himself in his last grim cheating of the
world.

Part One of _The Notorious Impostor_, as the sequel informs us, met
with a "general Reception." Advertised in the February issue of _The
Term Catalogues_, also, was a separate continuation. Interest in the
impostor did not diminish during February. "The Death of _William
Morrell_," complained _The Gentleman's Journal_ of this month, "hath
made too much Noise not to have reach'd you before this.... Had not his
Will and Life been printed, I would have given you a large Account of
both." The anonymous writer refers here, perhaps, to _Diego Redivivus_
("Will") and _The Notorious Impostor_ ("Life") in the order of their
publication. He then ironically lauds, in the verses of "_William
Morrell's_ Epitaph," the great skill of the impostor ("Columbus-like I
a new World descry'd, / Of Roguery before untry'd").

Elkanah Settle's two parts of _The Notorious Impostor_ were finally
published together in 1694 as _The Compleat Memoirs of the Life of that
Notorious Impostor Will. Morrell, alias Bowyer, alias Wickham, &c._ ...
under the imprint of Abel Roper and E. Wilkinson. So extensive are the
re-arrangements of the episodes taken from Parts One and Two that _The
Compleat Memoirs_ may be regarded as a fifth, very different narrative.
All the apologies for not resorting to "romance" are now dropped, and
the humorous dedication is replaced by a direct appeal to Gabriel
Balam, signed "E. Settle." _The Compleat Memoirs_ then reworks the
texts of the two Parts into a smooth, chronologically consistent
narrative.[5] Even more important in designating _The Compleat Memoirs_
as "new" are the "Considerable Additions never before Published"
announced by the title-page. After using the incidents from _The Second
Part of the Notorious Impostor_, Settle then adds: "Since the first
Publication of our fore-going History of our Grand Guzman, we have
receiv'd some Comical Adventures, worth inserting in his Memoirs, which
though they now bring up the Rear of his Chronicle, however, they were
the first of all his Wedlock Feats...." In the totally new adventures
that end _The Compleat Memoirs_ (pp. 72-88), the cynical tone and
raciness of the picaresque become even more dominant than in the
earlier separate narratives.[6]


The importance of the Morrell narratives in the development of English
fiction lies mainly in their deft combinations of the real and the
picaresque and in their conscious effort to unify the action, draw out
the humour, or handle realistic talk and setting. But the narratives
also look backward to an older type, the picaresque. William Morrell
makes his printed appearance as the new picaro. The title _Diego
Redivivus_ (i.e. James Revived) had overtones of the sensationally
picaresque. The witty pseudonym "Don Diego Puede-Ser" had been used by
James Mabbe in his translation (1623) of Aleman's _Vita del Picaro
Guzman_;[7] and more recent in English memories were the exploits of
James Hind, the English Rogue. In the Dedication, _The Notorious
Impostor_ describes itself as "_the Life of our English_ Guzman" and
later promises to "paint our new _Guzman_ in some of his boldest and
fairest Colours." But the picaresque traditions have shaded into one
another. For Morrell is not simply the new Guzman; he is also Hudibras
and, in _The Second Part_, Don Quixote.

Still another reason for the importance of the Morrell narratives is
their consciousness of fictional techniques and theory. In _Diego
Redivivus_, for example, the final deception is meticulously developed
with closely-woven incidents which do not appear elsewhere. The motives
of the characters, too, are sharply defined; and the action is unified
by the two references to oath-taking (pp. 2-3). The anonymous author,
at the outset, stresses the value of "the Particulars ... no
disacceptable Entertainment" (p. 1). Aware of theory, he specifies that
Morrell created "some Romantick narrative" to explain his poverty (p.
4). In fictional technique, Elkanah Settle approaches a unified theme
especially in _The Second Part of the Notorious Impostor_ and the
"Comical Adventures" of _The Compleat Memoirs_ where the incidents are
mainly of one kind--matrimonial. Theorizing appears, too, in Part One
somewhat in the manner of Daniel Defoe: "we dare not venture to play
the Historian any farther than certain Intelligence (which yet we have
not received) can guide us, being resolved not to load our Rambles with
Romance or Fiction, his Life being furnisht with matter sufficiently
voluminous without the addition of Flourish or Fancy" (p. 27). This may
be Settle's pointed reference to the "fiction" of _Diego Redivivus_.[8]
He maintains, also, that he had to delay for a fortnight the
publication of _The Second Part of the Notorious Impostor_ in order to
be certain of its authenticity.

Finally, the importance of the Morrell narratives may be seen in terms
of the realistic fiction that was to achieve fulfillment in the
eighteenth-century novel. The clear presence of fictional elaboration,
in _The Notorious Impostor_, caught the attention of both Frank
Wadleigh Chandler and Ernest Bernbaum.[9] Elkanah Settle thus rightly
belongs with writers, like Francis Kirkman, who masked fiction as the
truth. Historians of the novel, moreover, attach significance to _The
Notorious Impostor_ in its resemblance to the novels of Defoe, Mrs.
Heywood, and Smollett. Only the claim of influence on Smollett's
_Ferdinand Count Fatham_ has been investigated to any extent. In a full
analysis of Smollett's novel, Chandler's strong statement will have to
be taken into account: "The resemblance, indeed, between the two
anti-heroes and the terms in which the accounts of their cheating are
couched is so strong as to suggest actual borrowing on the part of
Smollett."[10]

    Spiro Peterson

    Miami University
    Oxford, Ohio


    Since writing the above, I have been informed by G. F. Osborn,
    archivist of the City of Westminster Public Libraries, that the
    registers of St. Clement Danes, in his keeping, have the following
    entry under 12 January 169-1/2: "William Morrell alias Bowier a man
    bur[ied] poor."




Notes to the Introduction


 [1] See F. C. Brown, _Elkanah Settle: His Life and Works_ (1910), pp.
22, 29, 127.

 [2] _The Life and Times of Anthony Wood_, ed. Andrew Clark (1892), II,
48-49.

 [3] _Games and Gamesters of the Restoration_, ed. Cyril Hughes
Hartmann (The English Library, 1930), pp. 123-137.

 [4] E.g. Alfred Beasley's in _The History of Banbury_ (1841), pp.
448-492, and G. T. Crook's in _The Complete Newgate Calendar_ (1926),
pp. 117-124.

 [5] The text of _The Compleat Memoirs_ is indeed a composite.
Paragraph one of p. 1 unites a paragraph from p. 1 of Part One and a
paragraph from pp. 34-35 of Part Two; pp. 1-27 are the same as pp.
5-27 of Part One; pp. 27-46: pp. 2-21 of Part Two; pp. 46-50: pp.
27-29 of Part One; pp. 50-57: pp. 22-29 of Part Two; pp. 57-65: pp.
30-36 of Part One; pp. 66-71: pp. 29-36 of Part Two.

 [6] _The Post Boy_ advertised _The Compleat Memoirs_ from February 17
to April 23, 1698. See also W. Carew Hazlitt (_Bibliographical
Collections_, Third Series, p. 229) for a description of a copy dated
1699.

 [7] Morrell's last impersonation involving the fake will resembles
Pantalon's "last Will and Testament" jest in Mabbe's _The Rogue or The
Life of Guzman de Alfarache_ (The Tudor Translations, 1924), II,
184-186.

 [8] Settle's authorship of _The Notorious Impostor_ is confirmed by
his name appended to the Dedication of _The Compleat Memoirs_.
Although _Diego Redivivus_ occasionally resembles _The Notorious
Impostor_, it need not necessarily be Settle's work. The similar style
and the identical documentation (e.g. the will) may be due to Settle's
direct use of the earlier narrative. None of its minutely-drawn
description, curiously, is perpetuated in _The Compleat Memoirs_. The
authorship of _Diego Redivivus_ remains an unsettled question.

 [9] _The Literature of Roguery_ (1907), I, 153: _The Mary Carleton
Narratives_ (1914), p. 6.

[10] I, 153. Ernest A. Baker makes a similar statement (_The History of
the English Novel_ [1937], III, 46). With respect to the influence of
_The Notorious Impostor_ on Mrs. Eliza Haywood, he should have cited
_Miss Betsy Thoughtless_ (1751)--the very book praised by Captain
Minikin as "worth reading" in _Ferdinand Count Fathom_ (Chap. XXXIX).




THE

Notorious Impostor,

Or the History of the LIFE of

William Morrell,

ALIAS

BOWYER,

Sometime of _Banbury_, Chirurgeon.

Who lately personated _Humphrey Wickham_ of _Swackly_, in the County of
_Oxon_, Esquire, at a Bakers House in the _Strand_, where he Died the
third of _Jan. 169-1/2_

Together

With an Authentick Copy of his Will, taken out of the _Prerogative
Court_, and the manner of his Funeral in St. _Clements_ Church-yard.

_LONDON_,
Printed for _Abel Roper_ at the _Mytre_ near _Temple-Bar_, 1692.




TO THE

Honourable Capt. _Humph. Wickham_.


SIR,

_When this following 'Paper makes thus bold to be your Addressor, the
only Encouragement for the Presumption is, that your borrow'd Name has
fill'd up so large a Sheet in our History, as justly entitles You to
this Presentation. And truly as a considerable part of it has already
furnisht you with no small Jest at your Laughing Hours, we hope the
Life of our English_ Guzman, _your late Adopted Name-sake, will be no
undiverting Entertainment. His Life, 'tis true, has been little else
than a continued Scene of Masquerade; and if to finish his last Act, he
had occasion of borrowing a Face and Character of Quality and
consequently fixt upon Captain_ Wickham; _alas, you must consider he
wanted Worth and Honour, and can you blame him for looking for 'em
where they were to be found? You stood fair for him, and the World,
however, it may censure his Impudence, at least it cannot but commend
his Choice. And the Reason (if you have any) to complain, is, that
whereas the World is but a Stage, and_ Life _but a Play, and Captain_
Wickham _was only personated to Cheat a poor Baker of a Fortnights
Lodging and Bread. 'Tis pity your Name, that much better deserved, was
only drawn in to the filling up of a Farce. But, as great a Thief as he
was to steal a Title of Honour, whatever hard Charge the poor suffering
Baker has against him, yet considering how little you have lost by him,
we hope your excusing Goodness will not load him higher than Petty
Larceny. And truly if he can feel it in his Grave, he has sufficiently
felt the Lash for it. His Last Will and Testament, I confess, has very
bountifully cantoned out your Estate; all the sorrow is, that the
Gaping Executors, and the rest of the Inheritors, have no shorter a
Walk than into_ Fairy-Land _to receive their Legacies; a longer
Journey, 'tis to be feared, than either the Bright Bay, or Dappled
Grey, will ever be able to carry 'em._

_And now to do our last Office,_ viz. _to speak a good word of the Dead
(for truly he had no Funeral Sermon to do it) they may talk of
Monuments and Epitaphs for preserving of Memories; but our_ quondam
_Operator of_ Banbury, _tho' with plainer Funeral Ceremonies, has taken
care for a lasting Renown, when much finer Dust under Statues and
Marble shall sleep forgotten: And whereas there are famous Examples of
old, that have perpetuated their Names at no less price than the
burning of Temples, his better Husbandry, to his Glory be it recorded,
has purchased Immortality much cheaper; where we'll leave him, and beg
your Pardon for this Boldness_

_Of_

Your unknown Humble Servant.




THE

Notorious Impostor:

OR THE

HISTORY

OF THE

LIFE

OF

_William Morrell_ alias _Bowyer_, &c.


This Famous Rover, from the Multitude of his Titles, to begin with his
right Name _William Morrell_, was by Profession a Chyrurgion, and more
than twenty Years ago, for many Years together, a Practitioner of good
Credit in _Banbury_, where his Industry honestly got him, by his
Practice, near two Hundred a Year, with which he maintained himself,
his Wife and Family very handsomely, till about eighteen Years ago
he began to be very Lazy, and much addicted to hanker after the
Conversation of the Gentry thereabouts; and being a Person very
Facetious, and his Company not disacceptable, he screwed himself into
the Society of the best Quality round about, and would be a Month or
two a Guest at several Great Mens Houses; more particularly he some
time since insinuated himself into the Favor of a Worthy Gentleman
near _Banbury_, viz. _Humphry Wickham_ of _Swakely_ Esq; whose Person
and Character he pretended to represent, and in which Imposture he
made his last _Exit_.

But to begin our History in order; From his Conversing with Gentlemen
and Herding with Quality, Business began to fall off: His many Rambles
from home, soon made his Practice flag; when the Glass and the Bottle
came into play, the Salvatory and Playster-box went out. And his
Patients could not well stay for the Setting of a Broken Limb, or
Tenting a Green Wound, till our _Esculapius_ was to be called, the
Lord knows where, and found the Devil knows when. This Trade
continuing, the other fell to decay, till at last Poverty began to
peep in at his Window, and Duns to hover about his Door. In these
little Exigencies and Necessities (for the Gentleman's Tables abroad
would not fill the Bellies at home, nor would Hunting or Hawking pay
Landlords Rent) his Wants put him upon Shifts and Artifices for his
Subsistence; and what with a Natural Wit and a pretty large Talent of
Confidence, the pressing Hand of Fortune threw him upon several Tricks
and Frauds to hold his Head above-board. But not to trouble you with
any of his lesser Diminutive Exploits, the Infancy and Nonage of his
Activity, we do not think fit to treat you with these pettier
Adventures, but e'en set out in one of his noblest Atchievements, and
paint our new _German_ in some of his boldest and fairest Colours.

Accordingly he Equips himself with a Sturdy Young Country Fellow, a
_Ralpho_ to our _Hudibras_, and takes a Knight-Errantry one day to a
Fair at _Brayls_ in _Warwickshire_, his Habit between a Grazier and a
plain Country Gentleman; where Santering about with his Man _Tom_ (for
so his Squire was titled) at last spying a Knot of good likely Kine
(near a Score of them). _Ah Master_, says Tom, _what a parcel of brave
Cattle are these_. _Ay_ Tom, replies the Master, _I am sorry I saw
them no sooner; these would do my Business to a T; but as the Devil
and ill Luck would have it, I have laid out my whole Stock already,
and so I'll e'en set my Heart at Rest_. The Country Fellow, the Owner
of the Cattle, seeing a Gentleman of his honest Appearance surveying
his Beasts, and hearing every word that pass'd between the Man and
Master (for they took care to talk loud enough to be heard) thought he
had got a good Chapman, and desired the Gentleman to draw nearer and
handle the Cattle. _Handle_, answers _Tom, what for?_ _You know, Sir,
you have laid out all your Money already, and what should we handle
Cattle unless we had Cole to buy 'em. I confess they are for your Turn
above any I have zeen in the whole Vair, but that's nothing, the Money
Master the Money._ _The Money_, replies the Country-man, _Troth
that shall make no Difference, nor break Squares between us; if you
and I can agree, the Cattle are at your Service: I suppose you are
some honest Gentleman hereabouts, and the Money will do my work next
Market-day. Pray what may I call your Name? My Name is_ Walters,
replies our Cattle-Merchant, _Walters, Master_, answers our
Country-man, _What any Relation to his Worship the Noble Sir_ William
Walters? _Ay, Friend, a small Relation, a Brother of his. A Brother of
Sir_ William_'s_! Off goes the Country-man's Bonnet at the next word,
and a long Scrape made; for no Respect was too great for a Brother to
a Person of such eminent Quality. _My Cattle, Noble Squire, Ay with
all my Heart._ In short after much ado to make the Country-man be
covered before him, he fell to treat about the Price of the Cattle, in
which he bargained so warily, that they had almost parted for a single
Shilling in a Dispute between them. But at last the Bargain and Sale
concluded, _Tom_ is commanded to drive home the Cattle, the Money to
be paid next Market-day, and the Country-man has the Honor to drink a
Pot at parting with his Worshipful Chapman our Sir _William_'s
Brother: This Feat performed, he takes a walk round the Fair, and
picks up a pretty Country Girl, a Mason's Daughter, at a small Town
about four Miles off, and gives her the common Country Civility of a
Fair, _viz._ a Glass of White-wine and Sugar. During this
Entertainment of our young Damsel, he is most desperately smitten with
her Beauty, insomuch that our _Inamorato_ must wait upon her home to
her Father's House, nothing but Death and Despair attending if he
cannot have that extraordinary Happiness. The Girl who by this time
had learnt his Name and Quality, was not a little confounded at the
pressing Importunities of a Person of his Worth to a poor Girl of her
little Capacity, and notwithstanding her modest Refusals, felt a
secret Pride from so kind an offer, and at last accepted of his
Service home. No sooner was she got safe handed home, and Mother and
Daddy, were privately whispered what Honor they received from such a
Visitant; the best the House could afford was not good enough for him:
after the courser Compliments of [_Lord, Sir, such a Person of Quality
under our poor Roof_] and the like; the best welcome that could be
made him was not wanting: Nay, for what was deficient at home, the
whole Neighborhood was Ransakt to lend help toward the Accommodation.
Our new Lover not to baulk a good Cause, openly Professes no less than
honourable Matrimonial Affection to his dear Conqueror. Estate he
wants none; and Portion or Quality are below his Consideration, the
Satisfaction of Love is the only thing in the World he resolves to
gratifie.

The Father and Mother are much astonish'd at such an Addressor to
their Daughter, nor is the Daughter her self a little surprized at it,
though of the two her Wonder is the least; for her Sexes natural
Frailty was so apt to make her think it the pure Effect of her own
sweet Face, that the power of her Charms, and the Quality of her
Captive was not altogether (she fancied) so extraordinary an
Adventure. In fine, Our passionate Admirer pushes on his suit with all
the Vigour and Application imaginable, and truly you may well conceive
so weak a Resistance could not well hold out long against so Puissant
an Assailer: The Siege is press'd home, and in three short days the
white Flag is hung out, a Parly beat, Articles concluded, and the Fort
surrendered. Our Damsel, in short, commits Matrimony; and the whole
Family is not a little Transported at such a Noble Alliance. Thus
Wedded and Bedded, Our new Couple are all Honey and Sweetness, and
though Sir _William Walter_'s House was not above a dozen Miles from
thence, his Adopted Brother all safe and secure, sleeps in the soft
Arms of his young Bride with all the Rapture of Pleasure and Delight.
After three Revelling days were spent in Feasting and Joy, the
Father-in-Law and himself enter in a close Cabinet Consult about
providing for Family and Settlement. He tells the Old Man, that truly
his Brother the Knight will undoubtedly take no little Dudgeon at this
Match, not that he cares a Farthing for't. He has Married the only
Creature of the World he can Love, and he is resolved to Cherish her
accordingly. But however, to manage Affairs with Discretion, he thinks
it his best Prudence and Policy, to get his Trunks and the Writings of
his Estate safe out of his Brother's Hands, before he publishes the
Marriage. And for that purpose he has no better way than for his
Father-in-Law to help him to a small Cart and a couple of able Horses,
and to drive to his Brothers, and take up his Trunks, _&c._ And
considering he had laid out all his ready Money in Cattle at _Brayle_
Fair, he desired the favour of him to furnish him with Ten Pounds,
that he might not be unprovided with a little of the Ready about him,
in case of any Rupture between his Brother and himself, till he could
furnish himself better amongst his Tenants.

The Old Man very readily embraced this reasonable proposition, and
though truly the Summ of Ten Pounds was above his Stock, nevertheless
living in Repute amongst his Neighbors, through great Solicitation,
some forty and some thirty Shillings, and such like Summs, with much
ado he raises the Ten Pounds desired; and more and above he procures
two very Able Horses and a Cart to bring away the Treasure aforesaid,
_&c._

By this time his Man _Tom_ having Sold the Cattle, is come to wish his
Noble Master Joy of his fair Bride, and so the Master and _Tom_
attended by a Brother of his Bride, an Honest Country Swain, who
though so highly honoured with this new Affinity, is at present
planted in no higher a Post than to be a Mate with his Man _Tom_ to
drive the Cart, set forwards, _&c._

The Brother-in-Law, Cheek by Jowl, with the fore-Horse of his small
Team, drives on very merrily for about Nine of the Twelve Miles to Sir
_William_'s, entertaining his Worshipful Relation with the very best
Tune he could Whistle all the way they travell'd.

But now within Three Miles of home, our politick Bridegroom thinks it
advisable, that one of his Carters, the Brother, should make a Halt at
an Alehouse where they stopp'd, and the whole Manage of the Cart and
Horses be intrusted with _Tom_, for fear the sight of a Stranger to
come to take up Goods at his Brother's might give occasion of
Curiosity and Inquiry, whereas _Tom_, an old Servant in the Family,
with less Suspision and Inspection might do it.

These strong Reasons (or indeed weaker would have served turn) were
satisfactory enough, and so the Gentleman Equipping his Brother
_Clodpate_ with a _George_ to stay and Drink till they returned, the
Master and Man fairly drive on, for the remaining three Miles to bring
off the Bag and Baggage, _&c._

The Potent Summ of a whole Half Crown to be laid out in Ale, set in our
Country Youth to a hearty Carouse with the kind Hostess of the House,
where the Esquires Health was over and over remembred, not forgetting
the Great Man at the Great House about Three Miles off; where, as
simple a Country Fellow as he was, he expected one day to be better
acquainted.

But to draw this Adventure towards a Conclusion, our waiting Carter
long expecting the return of the Brother, the Palfries and the Cargo,
notwithstanding the Strength of powerful Ale, and his Sweet Land-Ladies
diverting Company, began at last to be Impatient; sometimes he fancied
the Loading was too heavy for the Poor Beasts, and he thought it his
best way to walk out and see if he could meet them: But all Inquiry was
in vain, Night at last drew on, and the best part of his Half-crown
melted down; at last, though very Uneasie and Restless, he is perswaded
by his kind Hostess to take a hard Nap till Morning. The Cock was not
so soon awake as he, for to tell Truth, he ne're slept at all, though
indeed he dreamt all Night, for he could not think less, than that some
Retainers of the Family had undoubtedly followed the Cart, and Murder'd
the Squire to run away with the Treasure, and what his poor Sister
would suffer to be a Widow so early, was little less than a mortal
Apprehension. Thereupon very betimes in the morning he pads to Sir
_William_'s, and very earnestly enquires, what was become of the
Squire, the Knights Brother. Sir _William_'s Brother, _reply'd the
Servants_, we know none he has; 'tis true, he had one some years beyond
Sea, but whether dead or alive, is more than any Man upon _English_
Ground (_God wott_) can tell. How! no Brother-in-law Squire! No Sir
_William_'s Family! No Sister like to be a Lady, nor Brother a
Gentleman! nor no Horses nor Cart neither! This staggering Account, put
him into so doleful a Dumps, that he stood almost Thunderstruck. And
truly the twelve Miles home agen, was so tedious a Journey, and the
lamentable Narrative he must make 'em at home, so killing a Fancy, that
it was a great Mercy he did not make a stay upon some convenient Twig
in some Hedge in the Road, rather than live to be the Messenger of such
a woful, sad Tale--But ill News at last must out. The Bird and the
Beasts were all flown; the poor Bride sweetly brought to Bed, a Cart
and two Horses to pay for, a Son-in-law to find when the Devil was
blind, the Daughters sweet play thing lost, the Father and Mother dipt
ten whole pounds in Chalk, and the whole Family under the suffering of
a whole Chamberpot full of waylings and Tears for their Calamities and
Misfortunes.

But to return to our Rover: By the sale of Cart and Team, ten pound in
Cole the last lump, and the price of his Kine the other, his Pockets
were pretty well lined; and considering this spot might soon grow too
hot for him, he thinks it wisest to shift the Scene, and thereupon
dismissing, for some time, his Man _Tom_, who had pretty well lick'd
his Fingers in so profitable a Service, our Grasier now transmogrifies
into a Spark, and very sprucely rigg'd, takes a ramble Westward, where
meeting with no Adventure worth recital, in some small time he gets to
_Ludlow_. There taking up the first Night at an Inn, his Garb (though
unattended by Servants) soon made him good Reception; his first enquiry
was to learn out the Eminentest People in the Town, of which being
readily inform'd by the Drawers; he learnt, amongst other Relations,
that there was a Substantial Wealthy Tradesman, had two pretty
Marriageable Daughters: Being directed to the House, he addresses to
the Father, telling him he was a _Barkshire_ Gentleman, and intending
to make some small abode in _Ludlow_, he did not think fit to continue
in a Publick House, but would gladly gain admission to some private
Family. The Tradesman (whose name we will not mention) being a Widower,
and taken with the manner of his Discourse, kindly invited him to his
own House, which our Travelling Gallant as kindly embracing,
Accommodation was made, and he was lodged that very Night at this
private Landlords.

His entrance here gave him the opportunity of daily conversing with no
mean wit and charms in the two sweet Daughters of the Family; and our
Gallant, very apt to take fire at but a small matter of Beauty,
especially with a Portion at the Tail of it, felt no little wamblings
at the extraordinary accomplishments of the elder, somewhat the sweeter
Creature. But this new Adventure was not an enterprise so easie as the
last; this Sire of some fashion, was so far above the Education and
Extract of his former Father-in-Law, a Man of Mortar and Trowel; and
his Daughters of a reach and understanding so much beyond the others
humbler capacity; that measures must be quite alter'd here from those
that he took before. Accordingly now his discourse was always upon
Foreign subjects, himself and his own affairs the least part of his
talk; and if any inquisitive question, either by Father or Daughters
were made relating to his Family or Concerns, he answered with that
Modesty, and almost silence to all demands of that kind, that he left
their curiosity still in the dark; and which indeed was so much a
heightning to the favourable imaginations they had conceived of him;
that they doubted not in the least, but he was of eminent Quality; and
what any boasting Vanity would have made 'em rather suspect, his
Modesty on the contrary confirm'd. 'Twas some few days before they
inquired his name, for which he had ready at his Tongue's end, the
name of a very great Family in _Barkshire_; but not descending to
particulars, the remoteness of the place did not gain 'em much
intelligence of his Quality from only the bare name. All this while, at
some little distance, he dropt a great many complaisant words to the
elder Sister, which look'd very much like Love, and which he indeed
desired should be so interpreted. In this Conversation, now of a
Fortnights continuance, he had rendred himself so acceptable to the
whole Family, that a great many favourable thoughts on all sides
inclined towards him. The Address to the Daughter, at last looked a
little more plain and barefac'd, and at that time a Fair happening at
_Ludlow_, where he had been diverting himself with seeing of Fashions,
he came home in much Concern, and some kind of Passion, much greater
than hitherto they had at any time seen from him. "Certainly there is
no place in the world (_says he passionately_) so retir'd, but some
Devil or other will still find out and haunt me." The odness of this
expression invited the elder Sister to ask him what he meant. "Why
truly, Madam, (_he replied_) I have been hunted from three or four
Towns already, for in spight of all my resolutions of living
_incognito_, some unlucky Person or other comes full in my mouth, and
will betray me in spight of my Soul." This answer did but heighten her
Curiosity, and having, as she thought, some little Interest in him as a
profest Servant of hers, she was a little the bolder in pressing the
Question; and therefore plainly ask'd him why he liv'd _incognito_, and
what accident had now discovered him: To this at last, with a little
more frankness than he had hitherto used, he replied, the reason of his
Ramble from his Family, with his Living three or four Months past
unknown to the whole World, was only to prevent the ruine of a Sister,
who like a foolish Girl, was in much danger to be undone by a Beggerly
Match she was too fond of; and her Portion being in his hands, he had
absented himself from his home, left the softness of her tears, the
importunities of several Advocate's in behalf of this indigent Lover,
together with the weakness of his own tender heart, might at last be
prevail'd upon to grant his consent to what he knew would be his shame
and her undoing. And as ill luck would have it, he had unfortunately
tumbled upon a Countryman of his, now at the Fair, who would infallibly
run open mouth'd to his Sister and his Family, and tell 'em all where
he was. This discovery gave a good occasion to the fair Examiner to be
not only a Pleader for her own Sex in the Person and cause of his
unknown Sister, but likewise to be a Champion for Love. For now she
plainly told him, that a great many grains of allowance were to be
made, where hearts were inseparable. If this Lover of his Sisters was a
man of Sense and Quality (as neither of those he could deny him) it was
a little barbarous in him to oppose the whole Repose and Contentment of
so near a Relation as a Sister, for so sordid a consideration as a
little Worldly Interest. Besides, there was a Providence always
attended Faith and Truth in Love, and undoubtedly sooner or later would
provide for their well-being, or else enable 'em to bear a meaner
portion of Riches, which others perhaps might, less contentedly,
possess. This argument was almost the daily discourse, in which she
seem'd to gain some little ground, but not enough to perswade him to
the unreasonable Grant of his Sisters desires.

About five days after comes a Letter directed to him at _Ludlow_, with
the Post Mark upon it very authentically, which in a very legible
Woman's hand contained these words.

    Dear Brother,

    _What unhappy Star am I born under, to suffer all this miserable
    Persecution? Certainly, when my Father left me to your disposal,
    and tied my Portion to your liking of the man that must marry me,
    surely he could never have died reconciled to Heaven, could he have
    foreseen the Slavery he tied his poor Child to, in putting me into
    the power of so cruel a Brother. To run so many Months from your
    House, your Family, nay, your Honour too, (for what must the
    censuring world talk of you) and all to break a poor Sister's
    Heart. Oh shameful! to hide your self from the World, and run from
    Mankind, only to shut your Ears against Justice, and to be deaf to
    all Goodness and Humanity! Alas, what Capital Crime have I
    committed, who only loved a Gentleman, in Birth and Blood no ways
    my Inferiour; and what if an unfortunate Younger Brother's slender
    Patrimony of a Hundred a Year, is not answerable to a Portion of
    Two thousand Pounds. A wonderful Cause to make me the most unhappy
    Creature living, in refusing me the only Blessing the World has to
    give. How many fair steps to Preferment and Honour lye in the way
    of so accomplish'd and so well Related a Gentleman, notwithstanding
    his Elder Brother run away with the Estate; and what good Fortune
    have I not to hope for, if your Barbarous Aversion did not
    interpose between my Felicity and me. In short, resolve to return
    home, and be kind to your languishing, and almost despairing
    Sister, or else expect very speedily to be visited by her at your
    Bedside in her Winding-sheet. For if Ghosts can walk, and your
    Barbarity has sworn my Death, expect to be eternally haunted, as
    you shall deserve from----_

    Your Distracted----

The next Post four or five Letters more came after him; one from his
Bayliff, to desire him, for God's sake to come home again; for the
Devil a Farthing would his Tenants pay till they saw their Landlord. A
second from one of his Tenants, complaining of his bad Crop, and the
low price of Corn, and that unless he would bate him Twenty pound a
Year Rent, he could never hold his Farm; earnestly desiring his Worship
to come home, and take care of his poor Tenants, _&c._ A third
condoling his Misfortune in the loss of his Eldest Son, and desiring to
see his Sweet Worship's Face, that he might get him to put his Second
Boy's Life into his Copy-hold; and others of the like Import.

These Letters our Spark left in his Closet Window, and one whole day
going abroad, by a pretended Negligence, he shot the Bolt of his Closet
Lock out of the Staple, and so left his Door a-jar, and his Letters
expos'd to any body that would please to read 'em. This Stratagem
succeeded to his Wish, for the Daughter, whom I may now call his
Mistress, knowing him safe abroad, had dropt into his Chamber when the
Maid was making the Bed, and finding the Closet Door open, made bold to
peep, and spying his Letters there, tips the wink upon the Maid, whom
she made of the Council, and read 'em all out. The Contents put her
mightily upon the gog; for certainly she concluded he must be a Man of
a mighty Estate, so many Tenants, and the Lord knows what; and if a
Sister had Two thousand Pounds, what must an Elder Brother possess.
After she had conjured the Maid to silence, she could not forbear
running to her Father, and telling him all she had discover'd: The
Father at first a little reprimanded her Curiosity, but considering he
had found out a Love Intrigue between his Daughter and him, he thought
it no unwelcome discovery. At last looking very stedfastly upon his
Daughter's Face, with a sort of a kind fatherly leer, he cry'd, _Ah
Child, would he were a Bed with thee_. How, Father, _reply'd the Girl
blushing_. Nay no harm (_quoth the Father_) Chicken, that's all. Thou
sayst he makes love to thee, and troth I must own it no small part of
my Ambition to have a Person of his Quality and Fortunes for a
Son-in-law. In short, The Father gave her very seasonable Admonition;
for having sounded her Inclinations, and found 'em to his own wish,
with a Fatherly Authority he commanded her, if his Addresses hinted at
Marriage, to make him all reasonable Advances that way.

Our Gallant found his Plot had taken; for he had critically observed in
what most particular manner and station to a quarter of an inch he had
laid his Letters; and finding all of 'em displaced more or less from
the exact point he had left 'em, he plainly perceived they had all of
'em been read. Besides, in compliance to her Father's Orders, and
indeed a little to her own Inclinations, he discover'd her usual
Coldness to him a little diminish'd, and her Aspect more favourable,
which plainly told him the Bait had taken. Whereupon one Evening
finding her alone in her Garden, with a confidence more than usual, he
plainly spoke home, telling her what an inestimable Blessing he should
acquire in possessing so much sweetness for a Wife.

A long Courtship ensued, the Particulars too tedious, only the Girl was
a little more pliant than ordinary, but much doubting the integrity of
his Protestations; alledging it was very unlikely he would debase
himself to marry a Creature of her mean Fortune, for all she could at
present challenge, except what her Father might do for her after his
decease, was only a 100_l._ left her in her Father's hands by an Uncle
deceas'd. Our Gallant presently with much disdain seem'd to slight all
thoughts of her Fortune, for that, he thank'd Heav'n, he wanted not;
and truly her dear Person was the only consideration that had fix'd his
Heart intirely her Captive. To bring him to the happy point, 48 hours
are not past, before he comes to reap the fair Fruit. The marriage-knot
is tied; and the Nuptials consummated, and Joy and Felicity runs high
between them.

In this happy State, and uninterrupted Delights, they continued some
days, when of a sudden his old Servant, _Tom_, booted and spurr'd,
comes to _Ludlow_, and now in a little higher station than before, in
the garb and figure of one of his Bayliffs, he comes post thus far,
first to tell him the Distraction of his Family occasion'd by his
absense; 2dly, The Lady his Sister's sudden departure, God knows
whither, for she went away by night two days before he set out from
home, and has not been heard of since. And that a Letter was come from
_Bristol_, intimating that his Venture in _Sherry_ was safely landed
there, and that the King's Customs came to 97_l._ but his Correspondent
at _Bristol_ being lately dead, the Custom was yet unsatisfied; and
truly for his part none of the Tenants would pay him one Groat till
they saw their Landlord again, and therefore he could not raise the
Money to satisfy it. Our new Bridegroom hearing all this, presently
communicates the whole matter to his sweet Bedfellow, desiring her to
get her Father to accommodate him with that Sum; not that he ask'd it
as any part of her Unkle's Legacy, he scorned to be so poor-spirited;
no, he requested it as a Boon, and the Monies should speedily be repaid
with Thanks: Which if he pleas'd to do for him, his Servant should fall
down the _Severn_, and take care of his Wines, of which his dear
Father-in-law should have one Hogshead to drink to her _Hans in
Keldar_. The Daughter was a speedy and successful Embassadress, for the
Money was presently laid him down in Gold, for the more ease of his
Servant's carriage of it. _Tom_ had not been two hours gone, but a
Footboy in a very fine Livery brings him a Letter from his Sister,
signifying her extreme Concern for his deserting his Affairs and
Family, and that her Griefs and Disquiets had made her take a long
Ramble to see him once more. And that she was now at _Hereford_, not
daring to approach any nearer till she had his gracious Warrant and
Permission, which she humbly upon her bended Knees intreated of him,
with a great deal more passionate Courtship to him upon that Subject.
Upon perusal of this Letter he seem'd to melt into a great deal of good
nature and compassion for his dear Sister, insomuch that a Tear stood
in his Eyes which his sweet Bride very kindly drank in a kiss. At
length launching out into a great many tender Expressions towards his
Sister, which Goodness his kind Bride much applauded and encouraged,
throwing in many a kind word in her Sisters behalf; At last the Brother
concluded he would be so civil to her, that since her extravagant
Affection had brought her thus far to visit him, he would return her
the Favour of Riding himself to _Hereford_ to fetch her, if his kind
Father would procure him a Horse. Ay, with all his heart. Nay, both
Father and Daughter proffer'd to take the same Journey with him to pay
their Respects to the young Lady, and attend upon her as part of her
Train to _Ludlow_. No, by no means, replied our Spark; that was more
than the Rules of Honour would allow: for his dear Bride, as his Wife,
was a Person in Quality above her, and whatever Kindnesses she pleased
to show her when at _Ludlow_, was in her free Power; but this
complaisance was too great a Condescension, and consequently he beg'd
her leave that the tenderness he had of her Honour might absolutely
forbid her any such thought. And indeed his Father's was much the same
Condescention, which he must likewise no way suffer.

The Father and Daughter both silenced with this Answer, acquiesced with
his Reasons, as being much a more experienced Master of Ceremonies than
they could pretend to; consenting to let him go alone only attended by
the Sister's Page; in the mean while resolving to apply their officious
Respects to this fair, tho yet unknown Relation another way, _viz._ in
making a suitable preparation for her honourable Reception. But first a
very stately Horse was borrow'd, one that a Collonel of the Guards had
lately bid a lumping Sum for; with all Accoutrements answerable. And at
mounting, our Cavalier whispering in his Father's ear, and telling him
he had been long from home, and not knowing whether his remaining Stock
might hold out to his present Occasions, he desired---- The Father
would not hear out the Speech, but running up stairs presently, fetch'd
down, and stole into his hand a silk Purse richly lined with Twenty
Broad Pieces.

Our Squire thus every way obliged, after his due Conges all made, bids
them all Farewel till tomorrow, and so prances off. Here let us leave
the Father and Daughter as busy for the Credit of the Cause, as may be
imagined, making all suitable Provision for tomorrow's Entertainment;
the Kitchin, and Pantry, the Bed-Chamber, and the Court-Cubboard, must
all appear in Splendour extraordinary.

And now to return to our Traveller: Heaven knows he had the misfortune
to miss his way, for he never found _Hereford_, nor Sister. His Barb
too found another Chapman than the Collonel of the Guards; for both
Horse and Accoutrements all embargoed, and the dismounted Cavalier
slipt into a Frize-Coat of his Man _Tom's_ providing, who waited his
coming, The Master, Page, and _Tom_, in a small prepared Vessel,
troul'd down the _Severn_ as fast as Tide and good Speed could carry
them.

As we thunder'd down the _Severn_, one of our Strollers being at
present useless, our Page (well rewarded for playing his part in the
_Farse_) is dropt at _Worcester_, from whence we continue our Voyage to
_Bristol_. Arrived there pretty late in a Summers Evening, 'tis not
thought convenient to appear in any Dress whatever had been seen before
at _Ludlow_, nor indeed to expose his Face, lest any Inquiry might be
made there about him as a Sherry-Merchant, and so trunking up all his
best Rayment, he gets himself new rigged at a Salesman's in a genteel
Garb, but something modester than his _Ludlow_ Bravery, and _Tom_ and
he next morning move off to _Bath_.

It fortunes here, that he Quarters at one of the great Inns, it being
the beginning of the Summer, just before _Bath_ time, where was a brisk
Daughter of the house, about half way stage between 20 and 30. and
consequently much inclinable manwards. A Girl that had had the Honour
of many a slap cross the Mouth, and chuck under the Chin by Lords and
Earls in her time, her Fathers honourable Guests at _Bath_ season. Our
most constant Lover of every new face, feels the old Itch again.
Business he finds will thicken upon him, and therefore flusht with his
late Successes, he resolves to throw out his winning hand as far as it
will run.

But now to know what Portion this Damsel had, for without a spill of
yellow Boys, naked White and Red has but indifferent Charms with him.
This Intelligence was quickly made, without asking the question; for
there was a Jest in the Family of one of the Drawers being Suitor
there, who belike wanted a tite sum of 80_l._ to set up withal (a small
Portion of hers formerly left her by a Grandfather, and now at use.)
This Drawer forsooth was a Rival, but not an over-formidable one. For
truly our Inn-keepers Daughter had so often been tickled with the
Addresses of Quality, that (_Foh!_) her Fathers Drawer was scarce
worthy to hold up her Train. A Gentleman, or nothing for her. Nay, if
she has not the happiness to strike in for a Lease for Life at Bed and
Board with some honourable Person, rather than dye in ignorance, keep a
stale Maiden-head, and so lead Apes, she has long since resolved not to
stand out at a lower game, and en'e admit a Tenant at Will to an Inmate
of Fashion and Quality; and was grosly suspected she had tried the
Constitution of her Body, under a load of Honour long before her
present year of twenty five. But true or false, that's a small Blot, in
her Scutchion.

Our _Don John_ is absolutely captivated, and plies her home with all
the Rhetorick that Love can afford. Our man _Tom_ in the meanwhile but
very modestly, is whispering amongst his Mates, the lower Tire of the
Family, the Servants, what a Worthy Gentleman his Master is, being a
Rich _Norfolk_ Gentleman (a pretty large stride from _Bathe_) of 500 a
year. This Narrative passes pretty well amongst the shallower pates,
the Chamberlain, the Tapster, the Hostler, and the rest of the inferior
Domesticks; but our hardfaith'd young Mistress of the house, whither
bit before, or naturally not over-credulous, does as good as declare,
That her Principles are to look before she leaps. Our _Norfolk_ Suitor
finds his Addresses very acceptable, but still with a reserve, Provided
he be the Man he appears. He plainly sees, that the Girl, upon good
Grounds is very pliable, but she's a little past the years of being
dandled and kist out of her Reason: He or any man else (any Tooth good
Barber) with Honour and Estate may go far with her; but Demonstration
is the only Argument that must carry her Cause. As many years as she
has lived (or at least past for) a Maid, she is not so hard set, but
she can tarry till Substantial Testimony (as far off as _Norfolk_ lies)
can make out the Lands and Tenements, before she consents to an
Inclosure. Our Spark therefore put to his last Trumps, finds this last
a craggier and more difficult Enterprize than any he had ever yet
encountred; however, thinking it a very great scandal to his Wit, to
lie down before her, and shamefully for want of Ammunition, be forced
to raise the Siege, he sets all his Brains at work for one last Mine to
blow her up; or if that take not, he is resolved to quit the Field. In
a day or two after, he begins to be Melancholly and indisposed; during
this fit, he is very cold in his Love, and applies him to Religious
Books, talks much of very odd Dreams he has had, till at last he takes
his Bed. Physitians are sent for, whether they found any real
indications of sickness or no, or acquiesced to his own Declaration of
the Pains he felt, no Medicinal Application was wanting. His Distemper
increasing, he desires a Man of Law to be sent for, accordingly a
Scrivener of the Town is called, who draws up his Will, in which he
gives away about Three Thousand pounds in several Legacies, leaving his
Nephew his full and sole Executor. The Will is sealed up, and delivered
to his Man _Tom_; and all the cognizance taken of his Mistress, is only
10_l._ to buy her Mourning. Next a Man of God is sent for, and all the
necessary preparations for a Man of another World are made. His
Conscience setled, and his Viaticum for his long Journey most devoutly
furnisht. But it pleases Fate, or the Sick man rather, in some few days
after, to give some small symptoms of amendment, and to shorten the
matter, in Eight or Ten days time he is pretty well recovered, and the
next talk is of fancying his own Native _Norfolk_ Air for perfecting
his Health; all this while the young Damsel, who, tho not call'd to the
Will-making, knew all the Contents of it, and finding from all hands,
the great uprightness and devotion of her humble Servant, could not
fancy that so much Religion and Piety could be an Impostor, and
therefore she doubted not in the least, but the Estate in _Norfolk_ was
unquestionable; and tho indeed her Prudence would still incline her to
a full inquiry and satisfactory account, yet 'tis now too late, her
cooling Admirer talks of speeding to _London_; and tho he professes he
will leave his heart behind with her, She is afraid that new Faces and
better Fortunes will soon shake her hold there, and therefore taking
her Pillow upon the business, she resolves not to slip so favourable an
opportunity, but to lay hold of the forelock, and take a good offer
whilst she may have it: For with all her natural Pride, she considers
her self but the Lees of a Tap; and 'tis not every Rich Gudgeon will
bite at a Bait so blown, and so stale.

Her departing Lover still pressing for his Journey, the good-natur'd
Girl watches the next amorous sally of her Gallant, and takes him at
his word, and without asking advice, thinks her own wit sufficient, and
in two days time enters into _for better, for worse_. The Town-Bells
soon rung All Joy; and the best Hogshead in Daddy's Cellar run
_Claret_. His Honourable Guest and Son-in-Law was the little Idol of
all the Virgins of the Town, and the envied preferment of sweet Mrs.
_Betty_ had fill'd all Tongues; and scarce a Prayer offered up for a
Husband, but Mrs. _Betty_'s felicity was made the Pattern of their
Devotion.

But now, as the Devil would have it, our dignified Bride is for having
her Dear Spouse, by all means, doing her and her Father the honour of
staying out the whole Bathe Season (now coming on) amongst 'em, and
nothing can divert her from that resolution. This is a very unwelcome
proposal; for the multitude of Faces from all quarters of the Kingdom,
may not only be very dangerous to his circumstances, but likewise his
_Norfolk_ Abilities, long before that time, may be examin'd too
narrowly; and therefore not being able to make any harsh refusal of his
fair Brides request, lest it should look like design, and to marry a
young Girl, and be ashamed of her parentage, would appear so unkind,
that he has no Artifice to wean her from _Bathe_, and drill her out of
Town, but by pretending a small relapse of his Indisposition, which he
acted so well, that he denied himself the very pleasures of Love, and
fell off even from Family-Duties. This Curtain-failure began to
moderate her passion for staying at _Bathe_, for her tame Bedfellow
still preaching up the virtues of his own Native _Norfolk_ Air, his
poor defeated Bride could not but have a womanly longing for so
necessary a Restorative, and thereupon for so important a Medicine to
her feeble Yokemate, she consented to go along with him.

All her fine Cloaths were Boxed up, together with several Bed and
Table-Linnen, _&c._ (for she had pretty good Moveables, all the
Legacies of Deceased Aunts and Grannies, and other good Kin) and all
sent by her Man _Tom_ to the Carriers, and two days after places took
in the flying Coach for their speeding to _London_.

But one main thing was almost forgotten. She had call'd in her Portion,
which for a Guinies Gratification the Scrivener had ready at an Hours
warning, having at that time some other peoples Money by him
undisposed, and hers being out upon Mortgage, the Owners were very well
pleas'd to make an Exchange upon the same security. This Money was not
to be trusted by the Waggon, but to be carryed up with her in the Coach
box, for which her Man _Tom_ beg'd her acceptance of a little Gilt
leather'd Trunk that happen'd to be just small enough to go into the
Coach-box. The Day of setting out being the Morrow, her thoughtful
Spouse had nicely consider'd that the Coach would be in _London_ half a
day before the Carrier, which for some Reasons you'll find in the
sequel was not altogether for his convenience, and therefore he made a
shift to put off the Journey till next Coach-day.

Against that time the Gilt-leather'd Trunk, and the Key to it was
deliver'd her, (tho by the by he had got two Keys) and the 80_l._ some
Broad pieces, a Caudle-Cup, half a dozen of Silver Spoons, and some
other Toys were all stowed in it; and the Kind Couple are trundling
away for _London_, with the Man well mounted riding by.

Now as a Man of his Estate, he had freely given her all her own
Portion, a small Privy Purse to buy her Pins with, having Marryed her
only for Beauty, and much disdaining the addition of so small a sum to
his plentiful Fortune. The first stage being done (for they had but one
Night to lye by the way) the small Cabinet of Treasure was carefully
taken out of the Coach, and lodged in a Closet in the Chamber, and next
Morning deliver'd to _Tom_ to see safely laid in the Coach-box as
before.

The next Night arriving both at _London_, (whither _Tom_ about
_Brenford_ was commanded by his Master to speed a little before to
prepare for their Reception) a very fair Lodging near St. _James_'s was
ready to entertain her, but no _Tom_ had been there; and coming to open
the Trunk, instead of the Gold and Silver Entrayls there was nothing
but a Bag of Stones, and a piece of a Brickbat to supply their places,
enclosed in a few Rags that stuft up the Trunk. This amazing sight
threw the poor Lady into a most violent Distraction, and 'twas very
hard to hold her from falling into a Fit, her Husband seeming as much
amazed as her self, and joining in the complaint as loud as she. But to
abate her Rage, he told her the wicked Rogue should not so scape, he
had very sufficient security from able Friends for his honest and
faithful service, and their Purses should make her Reparation, till
when the Loss should be made up out of his own Pocket. Nor would he
sleep till he had made her some farther satisfaction, and therefore
beg'd her Excuse but for one half Hour till he took Coach, and made
that search and quest that perhaps would bring her some considerable
Light into the Villany. Her Zeal for her Loss never look'd any farther,
and accordingly well pleas'd with the Kind Motion, she took leave of
him for the half Hour aforesaid.

But, alas, a long half Hour, for half the Evening, nay the whole Night
was gone, and neither Man nor Master to be heard of. So Husband and
Portion all departed, she thought fit to secure her Goods and Cloaths
at the Carriers, but the same Calamity attended there likewise, for
_Tom_ had been there too, and swept all.

To describe the Distress and Anguish of our present Female Sufferer, or
either of her two foregoing Sisters in Affliction, being a work beyond
our power, we shall e'ne do as the Painter did of old, that is, draw a
Vail before the Face of sorrow, the Lineaments of true Grief being
above the Pen or Pencils skill.

And now to follow our Libertine through all his Rambles and Exploits in
this wide Town of _London_, (for there lyes his next Scene) being
matter we have not yet fully been inform'd in, we dare not venture to
play the Historian any farther than certain Intelligence (which yet we
have not received) can guide us, being resolved not to load our Rambles
with Romance or Fiction, his Life being furnisht with matter
sufficiently voluminous without the addition of Flourish or Fancy.

Let it suffice that some time after all these three successive
Adventures, the poor _Ludlow_ VVife comes up to _London_, being the
last place she has to make her quest after this Impostor and Monster,
for those are the gentlest Names her Sufferings and Resentments can
give him. She has a great Opinion that _Newgate_ or _Newgate_ Roll, or
some other such Chronicles of his Renown will give her some light into
his Life and Fortune, and perhaps the Justice of Heaven afford her a
sight of him at least, if not a power to execute Heavens and her just
Vengeance on so egregious a Reprobate.

Her Inn being at _Holborn_ Bridge, she lights into the Company of a
good Motherly VVoman just come from _Oxfordshire_; the sorrow in so
young a Face, and the swoln Eyes which were not yet dryed, the Fountain
being indeed inexhaustible, the Curiosity of the Elder Traveller made
bold to ask her the cause of so doleful a look, &c. The young one (who
now had no Reserves) plainly told her whole sufferings, to which the
Matron replyed, Alas young VVoman, what are your griefs to mine? I have
been many years the VVife of the most Infamous Miscreant that the Earth
ever bore; deserted and abandoned by the wickedest of Men, after long
years of Honest and Loyal Fidelity to his Bed, and exposed to perish
(which you, thanks to able Friends, need not fear) _&c._ with a great
deal more bitter Invectives against him. Till at last upon further
conferring of Notes, and describing of Characters and Persons they came
to jump together, and found 'emselves both abused by the very same
Monster, the eldest being indeed his old _Banbury_ Wife. What Amazement
this Accident produced may easily be conjectured, it will be enough to
tell you that the Anguish of both their Souls, and the Bitterness of
Gall on each side made 'em Swear an inviolable Friendship, determining
to search (if possible) the whole World, to hunt down this Devil.
Accordingly they take a Lodging a little higher in _Holborn_, where
making no secret of both their hard cases, they open their whole Souls
to their new Landlady to engage her assistance in the Quarrel. The
Landlady Transported at both their Narrations fell upon her Knees, and
blest God he had sent 'em to her House, for this _Lucifer_ they had
described, was certainly the very Man that next Week was to Marry her
Daughter. This surprize put 'em all into new Confusion, and the
Daughter being called to the Council, it was evident that this very
Fellow had made Love to the Daughter of the House, the day of Marriage
concluded, the Ring and Wedding Cloaths preparing, &c. This last
Deliverance made the poor old Woman, and the Daughter no less, melt
into Tears at this happy Discovery.

Well, 'tis agreed between 'em all, that they shall not stir till he
comes thither, which will be in twenty four Hours at most; and all
their united Vengeance, Constables, Warrants, and what not, shall be
prepar'd for his Reception.

This Resolution was heartily fix'd amongst 'em; only the _Banbury_ Wife
would that Evening take a walk to a Cozens, a Citizen, where she had
some important Affairs, but nothing should stay her abroad above an
Hour; she had not walk'd half a Furlong but Destiny or some other
ruling Power threw her full in the Mouth of her Husband; her Passion at
sight of him rose so high, that at first it could not find vent for
words, which he perceiving desired her to walk into a Tavern which was
just before 'em, and there recover her Confusion. You may conceive she
was very ready to accept the Invitation, her Stomach being so full,
that 'twas the only thing she wanted to have her full swing at him. The
Discourse of her part you may well guess at; but his Answer was so
tender, and his Confession so open, that at last she grew patient
enough to hear him out. He plainly told her all he had done, or at
least the greatest part: that it was only the Effects of his Wants and
Necessities, that now he had rais'd enough to re-establish him in the
World, that the Hony Moon of Love had been almost over between them,
and that if he had made any Lapse in Disloyalty to her Marriage Right,
it was not Infidelity but Interest that had enforced him to all. And so
showing her handfuls of Gold and Silver, he humbly intreated a
Reconciliation betwixt 'em. Which good Words and Address at last so
perfectedly obtained, that he perswaded her to send for all her
Houshold Goods, and to live with him somewhere in the Liberties of
_Westminster_, where disguising his Name, and amending his Faults,
he doubted not through his practice to recover a plentiful Being, and
maintain her like a Woman.

The poor Creature absolutely mollified, promises Fidelity to him, and
never returning to her new Lodgings, takes him along with her,
defeating the whole Vengeance that was hatching against him, and not
stirring from him till all her Goods were come up from _Banbury_, and a
new House furnisht with 'em. She had not lived there three days, till
finding a Gossiping Errand for her to keep her from home a whole day,
at her Return at Night to Bed, she finds neither Husband nor Goods, Bed
to lye, or Stool to sit upon; the whole House being utterly dismantled,
and nothing but nakedness and empty Walls to receive her.

This last Cruelty of her Barbarian made her almost run stark Mad, and
returning to her _Holborn_ Lodging to own her frailty in believing an
Infidel, and the Just Judgment that had befaln her upon it, she found
the poor _Ludlow_ Mourner departed, and all her Relief left was to
return to _Banbury_ to live upon the Alms of the Parish.

This Libertine Life of our Renegade did not long continue till found at
last by the _Ludlow_ Wife he was thrown into _Worcester_ Jail; from
thence by _Habeas Corpus_ (at the Charge of a Parson in _Southwark_
whose Daughter he had likewise Married) removed to _Newgate_, & upon an
Indictment of six Wives appearing against him, being then Tryed by the
Name of _Morrel_ alias _Bowyer_ (a Name of a Worthy Person of Quality,
for personating of whom he had stood in the Pillory) he pleaded Guilty
to those six and twelve more, and thereby received only the punishment
of a Squeeze in the Fist.

After this Escape of a Halter, what his following Adventures have been
we are not informed: 'tis to be believed his Will was no ways wanting,
though his power of managing such hardy Exploits might undoubtedly be a
little retrencht: and therefore we have reason to conclude he fell into
smaller Games, in which his Walks have lain something more obscure, and
thereupon by reason of our unacquaintance with the Truth of that part
of his Life, we shall over-leap some years, and bring him to his
Conclusion.

Some few days before _Christmas_ he came to one Mr. _Cullens_ a Baker
in the _Strand_ to seek him a Lodging, his Habit but indifferent, and
his Stock not above Two Shillings, pretending himself to be a Person of
Worth and Honour, _viz. Humphrey Wickham_ of _Swaclift_ in the County
of _Oxon_ Esq; a Person whose Name and Reputation was well known to
Mrs. _Cullen_, being Born not far from him, which contributed much to
the swallowing of the Imposture. His pretence for leaving his Family in
the Countrey, and living here _Incognito_ was occasion'd (he said) to
avoid the payment of 500_l._ which he stood engaged for, and for which
the principal had left him in the lurch; and which he had made a rash
Vow he would not pay.

Mr. _Cullen_'s Family thus imposed upon supplied all his wants, and
paid him the due Respects to the Quality he Personated, till falling
sick, on the 28th of _December_ he made a Will, as follows.


His WILL.

In the name of God, Amen. _I_ Humphrey Wickham _of_ Swatclift, _in the
County of_ Oxon _Esquire; being sick and weak in Body, but of sound
Mind and Memory, do make this my last WILL and TESTAMENT, revoking all
Wills by me formerly made: And as touching such Worldly Estate as God
hath been pleased to bless me withal, I do hereby give and bequeath the
same in manner following._

Imprimis, _I do give, devise, and bequeath, to my Kinsman_ William
Wickham, _of_ Gazington, _in the County of_ Oxon, _all that my Mansion
House of_ Swaclift _aforesaid; and all the Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments thereunto belonging, to hold unto him the said_ William
Wickham, _and his Heirs for ever_.

Item, _I give and bequeath unto_ John Cullin, _Son of_ Thomas Cullin,
_of the Parish of St._ Clement Danes, _in the County of_ Middlesex,
_Baker, all that my impropriated Personage of_ Sowgrate, _in the County
of_ Northampton, _with the Rents, Issues, and Profits thereof_.

Item, _I give unto Anne Cullin_, _Sister of the said_ John Cullin, _the
Summ of Two hundred and fifty Pounds_.

Item, _I give unto_ Thomas Cullin, _Son of the said_ Thomas Cullin,
_the Sum of Three hundred Pounds_.

Item, _I give unto_ Dorothy Halford _of_ Halford, _in the County of_
Warwick, _the Sum of two hundred Pounds_.

Item, _I give unto_ Richard Davis, _Son of_ William Davis _of the said
Parish of St._ Clement Danes, _the Sum of Four hundred Pounds_.

Item, _I give unto_ William Davis, _Son of the said_ William Davis,
_the Summ of Two hundred Pounds_.

Item, _I give unto_ Anne Fowkes, _for her Care and Diligence in Looking
after me in my Sickness, the Sum of one hundred pounds_.

Item, _I give unto_ Robert Croker, _Son of_ William Croker _of_
Sanford, _in the said County of_ Oxon _(being my God-son) the Sum of
Five hundred Pounds_.

Item, _I give unto the said_ William Croker, _the Sum of Five hundred
Pounds_.

Item, _I give unto_ Robert Penniston, _Son of Sir_ Thomas Penniston,
_and younger Brother to Sir_ Farmalis Penniston _of_ Cornhill, _in the
said County of_ Oxon _the Sum of Three hundred Pounds_.

Item, _I give unto Mrs._ Jane Penniston, _Sister of the said Mr._
Robert Penniston, _the Summ of Two hundred Pounds_.

Item, _I do hereby give, devise, and bequeath, all my Lands, Tenements,
and Hereditaments whatsoever, called by the name of_ Apple-tree Ducy,
_in_ Cropridee, _in the County of_ Northampton, _unto_ John Brooking
_of_ Rashly, _in the County of_ Devon, _Esquire, and the said_ William
Davis senior, _and_ Thomas Cullin senior, _and the Survivor of them,
and their Heirs, and the Survivor of them upon Trust and Confidence:
Nevertheless, that they the said_ John Brooking, William Davis, _and_
Thomas Cullin, _shall sell and dispose of the same; and out of the
Money thereby raised, pay, or cause to be paid, the respective Legacies
herein before bequeathed unto the said_ Anne Cullin, Thomas Cullin
Junior, Dorothy Halford, Richard Davis, William Davis Junior, _and_
Anne Fowkes. _And whereas I have herein before bequeathed unto my
Kinsman_ Will. Wickham, _and his Heirs, all my Mansion-house at_
Swacklift _aforesaid, with the Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments
thereunto belonging; my true Will and Meaning is, That the same Devise
is upon this special Trust and Confidence, That the said_ William
Wickham _shall pay, or cause to be paid, the several Legacies herein
before bequeathed unto the said_ Rob. Croker, _and_ Will. Croker,
Robert Penniston, _and_ Jane Penniston; _and also pay and discharge one
Bond for the Principal Sum of five hundred pounds, with Interest, which
I became bound for with_ Thomas Walker, _to one_ Thomas Irons, _any
thing herein before contained, to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding; and also that he the said_ William Wickham, _shall out
of his Legacy, and Lands, and Premises aforesaid, to him devised, pay,
or cause to be paid unto my Executors hereafter named, the Sum of five
hundred pounds, to be by them bestowed, distributed, or employed for
the use and benefit of the Poor of the Parish of_ Swacklift _aforesaid,
in such manner as they, or the major part of them shall think fit and
convenient_.

Item, _I give and bequeath unto the said_ John Brooking _out of the
Moneys that shall be raised of the Sale of the said Lands and
Tenements, called_ Apple-tree Ducy _aforesaid, the Summ of Five hundred
Pounds: And all the rest and residue of the Moneys that shall be
thereby raised, I do hereby give and bequeath unto the said_ William
Davies _Senior, and_ Thomas Cullin _Senior, to be equally divided
between them and the Survivor of them_.

Item, _I give and bequeath unto_ Alice Cullin, _Wife of the said_
Thomas Cullin _Senior, the Sum of Six hundred Pounds to her own proper
Use and Disposal_.

Item, _I give and bequeath in like manner the Sum of Six hundred Pounds
unto_ Jane Davis, _the Wife of the said_ William Davis.

Item, _I give unto the said_ Robert Croker _and_ Will. Croker, _the Sum
of Ten Pounds a piece to buy them Mourning: and also to each of them a
Ring of Twelve Shillings_.

Item, _I give unto_ Jane Croker _and_ Mary Croker; _and also to the
said_ Robert Penniston, _and_ Jane Penniston, _and all other my Legates
herein before mentioned, and to every of them the Sum of Ten Pounds a
piece to buy them Mourning, and a Ring of Twelve Shillings_.

Item, _Whereas I have the Sum of Seven hundred Pounds lying at Interest
in the hands of Mr._ Ambrose Holbitch, _in the name of_ Oliver Charles,
_my Servant, I do hereby give and bequeath the same to and amongst my
Four Servants_, Oliver Charles, John Harber, Sarah Winn, _and_ Margery
Smith, _and the Survivor of them, to be equally divided amongst them,
share and share alike_.

Item, _I give and bequeath my Three Geldings, and all my Accoutrements
belonging to them unto the said_ John Brookeing, William Davis _Senior,
and_ Thomas Cullin, _Senior_, viz. _my Bright Bay Gelding to the said_
Thomas Cullin, _and my Black Gelding to the said_ William Davis, _and
my Dapple-grey Gelding to the said_ John Brookeing. _All the Arrears of
Rent in my Tenants Hands at the time of my Decease I do hereby freely
acquit and discharge. And all the rest and Residue of my Personal
Estate, not herein before devised, after my Debts, Legacies and Funeral
Expences, paid and discharged, I do hereby give and bequeath unto my
said Kinsman_ William Wickham.

_And, lastly. I do hereby nominate, constitute and appoint the said_
William Wickham, John Brooking, William Davis senior, _and_ Thomas
Cullin senior, _Executors of this my Will; hereby revoking and making
void all other, and former Will or Wills by me made_.

_In Witness whereof I the said_ Humphrey Wickham _have to this my last
Will, containing one side of a Sheet of Paper, and almost half the
back, thereof, set my Hand and Seal this Twentieth day of_ Decemb. Anno
Dom. 1691.

Humphrey Wickham.

_Signed, Sealed, Published and Declared in the presence of us, with the
words_ (Will. Wickham) _being first interlined_, Rob. Smith, Jo.
Chapman, Rich. Chapman, Mart. Pinckard.

_I, the above-named_ Humphrey Wickham, _having omitted out of my Will
above-mentioned, the Disposition of my Estate in_ Huntingtonshire, _do
hereby make this Addition to, and part of my said Will, in manner
following: I give and bequeath all my Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, called_ Pryor'_s Farm, and all other my Estate in_
Holly-well _and_ Needingworth, _unto the above-named_ John Brooking,
William Davis senior, _and_ Tho. Cullin senior, _and the Survivor of
them, and their Heirs, and the Heirs of the Survivor of them, under
this special Trust and Confidence, that the said_ Jo. Brooking, William
Davis, _and_ Thomas Cullin, _shall sell and dispose of the same; and
out of the Moneys thereby raised, pay, or cause to be paid the
respective Legacies hereafter named_; viz. _I give and bequeath to_
Humphrey Longford _the sum of six hundred pounds, and to his Sister_
Mary Longford _the like sum of six hundred pounds_.

Item, _I give and bequeath unto the said_ Tho. Cullin _Sen. the further
Sum of_ 800 l. _and all the Remainder of the Moneys thereby raised, I
give and bequeath unto the said_ Will. Davis _Sen. and_ Jane _his Wife,
and the Survivor of them_.

Item, _Whereas I have by Will above-said, given unto_ John Cullin, _Son
of the said_ Thomas Cullin, _the impropriated Parsonage of_ Sowgrave;
_my true meaning is, That I do give and devise the same to the said_
John Cullin, _and his Heirs for ever. In Witness whereof, I the said_
Humphrey Wickham _have to this Codicil Addition, or further part of my
said Will, set my Hand and Seal, this Twenty eighth Day of_ December,
_Anno Dom._ 1691.

Humphrey Wickham.

_Signed, Sealed, Published, and Declared, in the Presence of us_,
Robert Smith, John Chapman, Rich. Chapman, Martin Pinkard. Probatum
fuit, _&c._

    This stupendious confidence of a dying man is very amazing, nay he
    drove on the Masquerade at that strange rate, that he may be truly
    said to have ended as he began, having received the blessed
    Sacrament, pretended the settlement of his Conscience, and making
    peace with Heaven with that seeming sincerity, as if he had
    resolved to prevaricate with God with the same assurance he had all
    along done with Mankind. The credulity of these deluded persons his
    Landlord, and the rest, is not much to be wonder'd at, when the
    last Gasps of Death could carry so fair an Hypocrisie, and their
    Transports for his extravagant Legacies bequeathed 'em are rather
    to be pittied then rediculed. And if they have been faulty in any
    little over-fondness of their imaginary good fortune, the Jests and
    Gibes they have received, have been their sufficient punishment;
    besides Mr. _Cullin's_ being run out of above 30_l._

    After his Death care was taken to provide him a Coffin of about
    10_l._ value, and the Embalmers were paid for some of their Office
    of preserving him sweet, till preparations for a solemn and
    sumptuous Funeral could be made, suitable to the remains of the
    honourable Deceased. And this Letter was sent as follows.


    _Sir_,

    These serve to inform you that _Humphrey Wickham_ Esquire of
    _Swaclift_ in the County of _Oxon_ died this morning at my House
    where he has been about ten days; He has made his Will, and you are
    one of his Executors with me and others; A very great share of his
    Estate is given to you; therefore pray Sir speed to _London_, that
    we may take care of his Funeral and other matters necessary to be
    done upon this occasion.

    I think it may not be amiss that you keep this private, lest any
    thing may be Purloyned or Imbezelled by any of the deceaseds
    Servants, or any else at his Seat at _Swaclift_, which is all given
    to you, some Legacies thereout to be paid; I am, Sir,

    _Your Servant_

    Tho. Cullin.

    London 3. January 169-1/2. From my House at the Wheat-sheaf near
    St. _Clements_ Church over against _Arundel_ Street. _Strand_.

    To Mr. _William Wickham_ of _Gazington_ inquire at the Blew Boars
    Head in _Oxon_.

    _These following Lines were inclosed from the aforesaid Executors
    in the said Letter being left by the deceased._

    Whereas, I _Humphrey Wickham_ Esquire, in Company with my own man
    _John Harbert_, _and John Austin_, Son of _Nich. Austin_, did carry
    a black Hoggs Skin Trunk, marked with the Letters

    _H. W._ 1688.

    Wherein are the Deeds of my Estate at _Sowgrave_ and _Apple-tree
    Ducy_; these are to desire you to deliver them to the Executors,
    signed with his own Name, thus

    _Humphrey Wickham_

    _Memorandum_, there are two Mortgages in the hands of _Austin_, the
    one for 1400_l._ and the other for 400_l._ In the name of _Oliver
    Charles_, in the hands of Mr. _Ambrose Holbech_.

In answer to this Letter came a Gentleman from _Oxford_ to tell Mr.
_Cullin_, that the Christian name of this Mr. _Wickham_ of _Gazington_
was mistaken, which gave the first Alarm of an Imposture, otherwise
Horse and Mourning had been provided to have carried him down to
_Swackley_ for his Interment there.

Mr. _Cullin_ being not over apt to believe himself cheated, but more to
satisfie the rest of the World, sent down a Messenger to _Swackley_,
with fifteen shillings in his Pocket, mounted upon a poor Hackney, but
ordered to return upon the Bright Bay Gelding bequeathed him in his
Will; being not convinced of the Delusion till his Messengers Return
notwithstanding several persons of Reputation had declared him a
counterfeit; & Major _Richardson_ and Mr. _Compton_ had both inspected
the Corps, and averred him to be the very man formerly Judged for six
Wives as before mentioned, and more than once their Prisoner in
Newgate.

The Messenger returning _Tuesday_ the 12th of _January_ he brought a
Compliment to the Executors from Captain _Wickham_, (who had treated
the Messenger very civilly,) to this effect; that he gave 'em his
hearty thanks for their intended kindness to him, and if they would
please to come to _Swackley_ for a Month or more they should be very
welcome, and have the use of all the Geldings, _viz._ the Black, the
Bright Bay, and Dapple Grey, tho he could not well part with 'em for
good and all.

Upon this full satisfaction received, about three the next Morning with
no more than a Watchman and a Lanthorn in a Coffin of four shillings
price, he was laid in Earth in a Nook of St. _Clements_ Churchyard.


Postscript.

The Nurse and Assistants that attended him in his sickness now call to
mind, that they once or twice observed him to laugh to himself very
pleasantly, which they suppose proceeded from the pleasure he took in
cheating the World he was then just upon leaving.

_FINIS._




_DIEGO REDIVIVUS:_

or the

Last WILL

AND

TESTAMENT

Of the Pretended

_Humphrey Wickham_, Esq;

Alias WILLIAM MORREL, alias BOWYER, &c.

WITH A Full RELATION of his Notorious CHEATS and IMPOSTURES: Who dyed
at Mr. _Cullins_ House, the Third of this Instant _January_, in the
Parish of St. _Clement Danes_, &c.


_LICENSED and Entred in the REGISTER-BOOK of the Company of
Stationers._


_LONDON_, Printed for _Abel Roper_, at the _Mitre_ near _Temple-Bar_.
1692.




ADVERTISEMENT.


This is to give notice, That the Fine COFFIN, mentioned in the
following Relation, is to be sold in _Shipyard_, without _Temple-bar_.




    _The Last_ Will _and_ Testament _of the pretended_ Humphrey Wickham
    _Esq_; _alias_ William Morrel, _alias_ Bowyer, _&c. with
    Annotations thereupon_.

The Publick undoubtedly cannot be better entertained, than by the
following Relation, of one of the most notorious Cheats as has been
known in an Age, which has already made a very amazing Noise in the
Town and the Particulars whereof, may be no disacceptable
Entertainment.

A Person not over-well Clad, was seen standing gazing about him in the
Streets, over-against _Arundel_-Buildings in the _Strand_; but the
gravity of his Age (being a Person between 50 and 60) invited the
Curiosity of Mr. _Cullin_ the Baker, to ask this unknown Person what he
wanted? To which he replied, He wanted a Lodging. Upon this, Mr.
_Cullin_ very courteously made answer, He should be welcome to his
House; which he very easily and readily accepted; and accordingly was
received very kindly. Now having no extraordinary Stock of Money,
_viz._ but Two Shillings in his Pocket, he was exposed to the necessity
of making use of some Romantick Narrative of his Quality and Condition,
to make good his Quarters with so slender a Purse, to hold out payment.
Accordingly the Curiosity of his Landlady enquiring what Country-man he
was? He replied, _Oxfordshire_; that his Name was _Wickham_, a Person
of a good Estate near _Banbury_; and that the occasion of his coming to
Town, was only to avoid the payment of 500_l._ which he stood engaged
for by Bond, in behalf of a Person that was run away, and had left him
to pay that Money, and which truly he had made an Oath to himself he
would never pay; not that the Summ was so considerable to a Man of his
plentiful Fortune, only he was resolved to keep his Vow; and that had
made him retire a little from being arrested for it.

The Affability and good Language of this Person of imaginary Quality,
soon found Credit with his believing Landlord and Landlady, and no
Caress was thought kind enough to a Person of his eminent Figure and
Extraction. His first entrance into this indulgent Family was about a
fortnight before _Christmass_, where he gained that daily ground, that
no Respect could be sufficiently paid him: His little Pocket Strength
signified nothing, for his Host was not a little exalted with the
Honour of such a Guest under his Roof.

But, as Providence was pleased to order it, his Reign was ordain'd to
be but short; for he soon fell into a languishing Sickness, in which
time neither Doctor, Apothecary, Nurse, or any other Assistance was
wanting.

Now our pretended Captain, what ever other Faults he had, was resolv'd
not to be guilty of Ingratitude, and accordingly made an ample Last
Will and Testament, and most liberally gave extraordinary large
Donations and Legacies to his kind Landlord, _&c._

It was very remarkable, that during his Sickness, his Landlord, being
Overseer of the Poor, had requested a kind Brother in Office, the
Church-Warden, to pay a small Office of Christian Duty to this poor
languishing Gentleman; who making him a condoling Visit, with wet Eyes
and uplifted Hands, was so kind as to wish his Worship's Soul
everlasting Rest, which was seconded by many a repeated sigh from the
rest of the Condolers about him: And one more especially, having heard
of this great Wind-fall, lamented much his Unhappiness, in not visiting
this Gentleman, saying, _He was never born to do himself good, having
lost by his Negligence at least_ 1000_l._ Also another eminent Man of
the Parish, being dissatisfied that he did not come in for a Share with
the rest of his Neighbours, went and told them, _That the Coroner ought
to be sent for, and an Enquiry made how he died_.

All Care and Application signified but little, for his last _Exit_ was
drawing on; in which time, not in the least to shrink from his
Character of Quality, he still kept up the Honourable Figure he had so
long presented; and accordingly made most prodigious Protestations of
Good-will and Acknowledgments to the Family, avowing that the few
Hundreds he had bequeathed them, was nothing to what he would do for
'em, if please God to lengthen his Life to serve them and theirs.

And now having performed the Part of a good Patron and Friend, as his
last Legacies do sufficiently testifie; he was resolved to be as good a
Christian too, and thereupon requested the taking the Sacrament: To
which, being admitted (with what Integrity you'll find by the Sequel)
with a grave Countenance to the very last, he was very ready to receive
the Sacrament; and upon so serious an Undertaking, was pleased to put a
Case of Conscience to the Minister, _viz._ having made a Vow never to
pay the 500_l._ he stood engaged for, Whether he was obliged to keep
his Vow, or no? To which being answered in the Negative, That he was
obliged to pay his Debts, notwithstanding his rash Vow. He made answer,
That truly now drawing near Heaven, he considered the point, and
acquiesced with his Ghostly Monitor; and thereupon incerted the 500_l._
into the Will.

This piece of extraordinary Justice being perform'd with a very
composed and setled mind he left this troublesom World on _Sunday_ the
Third Instant, seeming very well contented to part with his great
Riches and Lands, for the more valuable consideration of future
Happiness.

Now I must do the Family this Right, That notwithstanding the great
Sums they gain'd by so ample a Testament, and such bounteous Legacies,
however their sorrow for the lamented Departure of so worthy a
Gentleman was very hearty and cordial: Nay, some are of Opinion, that
instead of diminishing (as Sorrow generally wears off) theirs, on the
contrary is daily encreasing.

But perhaps nothing was so unkind as excluding the poor Prentice from
visiting the sick Gentleman. For, alas, the poor Boy has been heard
most dolefully to bewail the unkindness of his Master; for undoubtedly
the worthy Gentleman would have left him enough to have set him up, had
he been amongst the Throng of Visitants, who all tasted so highly of
his extravagant Liberality.

Now to assure you that the Kindness of his Executors continued beyond
his Death, they thought themselves so far indebted to his Memory, that
not only the Embalmer was sent for, but likewise a Coffin, price 12_l._
was made, and all little enough for so generous a Patron, so much as
Mourning, and Rings, and what else bespoken, _&c._

But before these Honourable Exequies could be performed, an unhappy
Letter from the True _Humphrey Wickham_ Esq; a Person of a great Estate
and Reputation, detected the whole Fraud and Delusion, and the Remains
of our _Quandam_ Person of Honour was committed to Earth, in a Coffin,
price 4_s._ with Shrowd and other Funeral Materials accordingly.

You are hereby informed, That this grand Impostor, whose true Name was
_VVilliam Morrell_ alias _Bowyer_, formerly a Surgeon in _Banbury_, had
been two Months a Guest at Mr. _Wickham_'s, and thereby so acquainted
with his Family as enabled him to personate the Cheat so artificially,
and so we leave him.

_His_ WILL.

_In the Name of God, Amen_, I _Humphrey Wickham_ of _Swaclift_, in the
County of _Oxon_ Esq; being sick and weak in Body, but of sound Mind
and Memory, do make this my last WILL and TESTAMENT, revoking all Wills
by me formerly made: And as touching such Worldly Estate as God hath
been pleased to bless me withal, I do hereby give and bequeath the same
in manner following:

_Imprimis_, I do give, devise, and bequeath to my Kinsman _William
Wickham_, Son of _George Wickham_, of _Gazington_ in the County of
_Oxon_, all that my Mansion-House of _Swaclift_ aforesaid; and all the
Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments thereunto belonging, to hold unto
him the said _William Wickham_, and his Heirs forever.

_Item_, I give and bequeath unto _John Cullin_, Son of _Thomas Cullin_,
of the Parish of St. _Clement Danes_, in the County of _Middlesex_,
Baker, all that my impropriated Parsonage of _Sowgrate_, in the County
of _Northampton_, with the Rents, Issues, and Profits thereof.

_Item_, I give unto _Anne Cullin_, Sister of the said _John Cullin_,
the Summ of Two hundred and fifty Pounds.

_Item_, I give unto _Thomas Cullin_, Son of the said _Thomas Cullin_,
the Summ of Three hundred Pounds.

_Item_, I give unto _Dorothy Halford_, Daughter of _Thomas Halford_ of
_Halford_, in the County of _Warwick_, the Summ of Two hundred Pounds.

_Item_, I give unto _Richard Davis_, Son of _William Davis_ of the said
Parish of St. _Clement Danes_, the Summ of Four hundred Pounds.

_Item_, I give unto _William Davis_, Son of the said _William Davis_,
the Summ of Two hundred Pounds.

_Item_, I give unto _Anne Fowkes_, for her Care and Diligence in
Looking after me in my Sickness, the Summ of One hundred Pounds.

_Item_, I give unto _Robert Croker_, Son of _William Croker_ of
_Sanford_, in the said County of _Oxon_ (being my God-son) the Sum of
Five Hundred Pounds.

_Item_, I give unto the said _William Croker_, the Summ of Five hundred
Pounds.

_Item_, I give unto _Robert Penniston_, Son of Sir _Thomas Penniston_,
and younger Brother to Sir _Farmalis Penniston_ of _Cornhill_, in the
said County of _Oxon_ the Summ of Three hundred Pounds.

_Item_, I give unto Mrs. _Jane Penniston_, Sister of the said Mr.
_Robert Penniston_, the Summ of Two hundred Pounds.

_Item_, I do hereby give, devise, and bequeath, all my Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments whatsoever, called by the Name of
_Apple-tree Ducy_, in _Cropridee_, in the County of _Northampton_, unto
_John Brooking_ of _Rashly_, in the County of _Devon_, Esquire, and the
said _William Davis_ Senior, and _Thomas Cullin_ Senior, and the
Survivor of them, and their Heirs, and the Survivor of them upon Trust
and Confidence: Nevertheless, that they the said _John Brooking_,
_VVilliam Davis_, and _Thomas Cullin_, shall sell and dispose of the
same; and out of the Money thereby raised, pay, or cause to be paid,
the respective Legacies herein before bequeathed unto the said _Anne
Cullin_, _Thomas Cullin_ Jun. _Dorothy Halford_, _Richard Davis_,
_VVilliam Davis_ Jun. and _Anne Fowkes_. And whereas I have herein
before bequeathed unto my Kinsman _VVilliam VVickham_, and his Heirs,
all my Mansion-House at _Swaclift_ aforesaid, with the Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments thereunto belonging; my true Will and
Meaning is, That the same Devise is upon this special Trust and
Confidence, That the said _VVilliam VVickham_ shall pay, or cause to be
paid, the several Legacies herein before bequeathed unto the said _Rob.
Croker_, and _VVil. Croker_, _Robert Penniston_, and _Jane Penniston_;
and also pay and discharge one Bond for the Principal Sum of five
hundred Pounds, with Interest, which I became bound for and with
_Thomas VValker_, to one _Thomas Irons_, any thing herein
before-contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding;
and also that he the said _VVilliam VVickham_, shall out of his Legacy,
and Lands, and Premises aforesaid, to him devised, pay, or cause to be
paid unto my Executors hereafter named, the Sum of Five hundred Pounds,
to be by them bestowed, distributed, or employed for the use and
benefit of the Poor of the Parish of _Swaclift_ aforesaid, in such
manner as they, or the major part of them shall think fit and
convenient.

_Item_, I give and bequeath unto the said _John Brooking_ out of the
Moneys that shall be raised of the Sale of the said Lands and
Tenements, called _Apple-tree Ducy_ aforesaid, the Summ of Five hundred
Pounds: And all the rest and residue of the Moneys that shall be
thereby raised. I do hereby give and bequeath unto the said _VVilliam
Davies_ Senior, and _Thomas Cullin_ Senior, to be equally divided
between them and the Survivor of them.

_Item_, I give and bequeath unto _Alice Cullin_, Wife of the said
_Thomas Cullin_ Senior, the Sum of Six hundred Pounds to her own proper
Use and Disposal.

_Item_, I give and bequeath in like manner the Summ of Six hundred
Pounds unto _Jane Davis_, the Wife of the said _VVilliam Davis_.

_Item_, I give unto the said _Robert Croker_ and _VVill. Croker_, the
Summ of Ten Pounds a-piece to buy them Mourning: and also to each of
them a Ring of Twelve Shillings.

_Item_, I give unto _Jane Croker_ and _Mary Croker_; and also to the
said _Robert Peniston_, and _Jane Peniston_, and all other my Legatees
herein before-mentioned, and to every of them the Summ of Ten Pounds
a-piece to buy them Mourning, and a Ring of Twelve Shillings.

_Item_, Whereas I have the Sum of Seven hundred Pounds, lying at
Interest in the hands of Mr. _Ambrose Holbitch_, in the name of _Oliver
Charles_, my Servant, I do hereby give and bequeath the same to and
amongst my Four Servants, _Oliver Charles_, _John Harbert_, _Sarah
VVinn_, and _Margery Smith_, and the Survivor of them, to be equally
divided amongst them, share and share alike.

_Item_, I give and bequeath my Three Geldings, and all my Accoutrements
belonging to them unto the said _John Brookeing_, _VVilliam Davis_
Senior, and _Thomas Cullin_, Sen. _viz._ my Bright Bay Gelding to the
said _Thomas Cullin_, and my Black Gelding to the said _VVilliam
Davis_, and my Dapple-grey Gelding to the said _John Brooking_. All the
Arrears of Rent in my Tenants Hands at the time of my Decease I do
hereby freely acquit and discharge. And all the rest and Residue of my
Personal Estate, not herein before devised, after my Debts, Legacies
and Funeral Expences, paid and discharged, I do hereby give and
bequeath unto my said Kinsman _VVilliam VVickham_.

And, lastly, I do hereby nominate, constitute and appoint the said
_VVilliam VVickham_, _John Brooking_, _VVilliam Davis_ Senior, and
_Thomas Cullin_ Senior, Executors of this my Will; hereby revoking and
making void all other, and former Will or Wills by me made.

In Witness whereof I the said _Humphrey VVickham_ have to this my last
Will, containing one side of a Sheet of Paper, and almost half the back
thereof, set my Hand and Seal this Twenty seventh day of _December,
Anno Dom._ 1691.

_Humphrey Wickham._

Signed, Sealed, Published and Declared in the presence of us, with the
Words (_VVill. VVickham_) being first interlined, _Rob. Smith_, _Jo.
Chapman_, _Rich. Chapman_, _Mart. Pinckard_.

I, the above named _Humphrey VVickham_, having omitted out of my Will
above-mentioned, the Disposition of my Estate in _Huntingtonshire_, do
hereby make this Addition to, and part of my said Will, in manner
following. I give and bequeath all my Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, called _Pryor_'s Farm, and all other my Estate in
_Hollywell_ and _Needingworth_, or else where, in the said County of
_Huntington_, unto the above named _John Brooking_, _VVilliam Davis_
Senior, and _Tho. Cullin_ Sen. and the Survivor of them, and their
Heirs, and the Heirs of the Survivor of them, under this special Trust
and Confidence, that the said _Jo. Brooking_, _VVilliam Davis_, and
_Thomas Cullen_, shall sell and dispose of the same; and out of the
Moneys thereby raised, pay, or Cause to be paid the respective Legacies
hereafter named, _viz._ I give and bequeath to _Humphrey Longford_ the
sum of six hundred pounds, and to his Sister _Mary Longford_ the like
sum of six hundred pounds.

_Item_, I give and bequeath unto the said _Tho. Cullin_ Sen. the
further Summ of 800_l._. and all the Remainder of the Moneys thereby
raised, I give and bequeath unto the said _Will. Davis_ Sen. and _Jane_
his Wife, and the Survivor of them.

_Item_, Whereas I have by Will above-said, given unto _John Cullin_,
Son of the said _Thomas Cullin_, the impropriated Parsonage of
_Sowgrave_; my true meaning is, That I do give and devise the same to
the said _John Cullin_, and his Heirs for ever. In Witness whereof, I
the said _Humphrey Wickham_ have to this Condicil Addition, or further
part of my said Will, set my Hand and Seal, this Twenty eighth Day of
_December_, Anno Dom. 1691.

_Humphrey Wickham._

Signed, Sealed, Published, and Declared, in the Presence of us, _Robert
Smith_, _John Chapman_, _Rich. Chapman_, _Martin Pinkard_,

    _Probatum fuit hum. Testium. cum Codicillo eidem annex. coram
    Venerab. Vir. Henrico Fauconberge Legum Doctore, Surr. Venerab. &
    Egregii Viri Dom. Richardi Raines Militis, Legem etiam Doctoris
    Curiæ Prærogativæ Cantuar. Magist. &c. Quarto die Mensis Januarii,
    Anno Dom. (Stilo Angliæ, 1691.) Juramentis Willielmi Davis, & Thomæ
    Cullen, duorum ex Executor. &c. Quibus, &c. de bene & fidel.
    Administrand. eadem ad Sancta Dei Evangelia Jurat. Reservata
    potestate similem Com. faciendi Willielmo Wickham & Johanni
    Brooking, alteris Executor. eum venerint seu eorum a'ter venerit
    eand. petitur._

_FINIS_




PUBLICATIONS OF THE AUGUSTAN REPRINT SOCIETY


First Year (1946-1947)

Numbers 1-6 out of print.


Second Year (1947-1948)

 7. John Gay's _The Present State of Wit_ (1711); and a section on
Wit from _The English Theophrastus_ (1702).

 8. Rapin's _De Carmine Pastorali_, translated by Creech (1684).

 9. T. Hanmer's (?) _Some Remarks on the Tragedy of Hamlet_ (1736).

10. Corbyn Morris' _Essay towards Fixing the True Standards of Wit,
etc._ (1744).

11. Thomas Purney's _Discourse on the Pastoral_ (1717).

12. Essays on the Stage, selected, with an Introduction by Joseph Wood
Krutch.


Third Year (1948-1949)

13. Sir John Falstaff (pseud.), _The Theatre_ (1720).

14. Edward Moore's _The Gamester_ (1753).

15. John Oldmixon's _Reflections on Dr. Swift's Letter to
Harley_(1712); and Arthur Mainwaring's _The British Academy_ (1712).

16. Nevil Payne's _Fatal Jealousy_ (1673).

17. Nicholas Rowe's _Some Account of the Life of Mr. William
Shakespeare_ (1709).

18. "Of Genius," in _The Occasional Paper_, Vol. III, No. 10 (1719);
and Aaron Hill's Preface to _The Creation_ (1720).


Fourth Year (1949-1950)

19. Susanna Centlivre's _The Busie Body_ (1709).

20. Lewis Theobold's _Preface to The Works of Shakespeare_ (1734).

21. _Critical Remarks on Sir Charles Grandison, Clarissa, and Pamela_
(1754).

22. Samuel Johnson's _The Vanity of Human Wishes_ (1749) and Two
_Rambler_ papers (1750).

23. John Dryden's _His Majesties Declaration Defended_ (1681).

24. Pierre Nicole's _An Essay on True and Apparent Beauty in Which from
Settled Principles is Rendered the Grounds for Choosing and Rejecting
Epigrams_, translated by J. V. Cunningham.


Fifth Year (1950-1951)

25. Thomas Baker's _The Fine Lady's Airs_ (1709).

26. Charles Macklin's _The Man of the World_ (1792).

27. Out of print.

28. John Evelyn's _An Apologie for the Royal Party_ (1659); and _A
Panegyric to Charles the Second_ (1661).

29. Daniel Defoe's _A Vindication of the Press_ (1718).

30. Essays on Taste from John Gilbert Cooper's _Letters Concerning
Taste_, 3rd edition (1757), & John Armstrong's _Miscellanies_(1770).


Sixth Year (1951-1952)

31. Thomas Gray's _An Elegy Wrote in a Country Church Yard_ (1751); and
_The Eton College Manuscript_.

32. Prefaces to Fiction; Georges de Scudéry's Preface to _Ibrahim_
(1674), etc.

33. Henry Gally's _A Critical Essay_ on Characteristic-Writings (1725).

34. Thomas Tyers' A Biographical Sketch of Dr. Samuel Johnson (1785).

35. James Boswell, Andrew Erskine, and George Dempster. _Critical
Strictures on the New Tragedy of Elvira, Written by Mr. David Malloch_
(1763).

36. Joseph Harris's _The City Bride_ (1696).


Seventh Year (1952-1953)

37. Thomas Morrison's _A Pindarick Ode on Painting_ (1767).

38. John Phillips' _A Satyr Against Hypocrites_ (1655).

39. Thomas Warton's _A History of English Poetry_.

40. Edward Bysshe's _The Art of English Poetry_ (1708).

41. Bernard Mandeville's "A Letter to Dion" (1732).

42. Prefaces to Four Seventeenth-Century Romances.


Eighth Year (1953-1954)

43. John Baillie's _An Essay on the Sublime_ (1747).

44. Mathias Casimire Sarbiewski's _The Odes of Casimire_, Translated by
G. Hils (1646).

45. John Robert Scott's _Dissertation on the Progress of the Fine
Arts._

46. Selections from Seventeenth Century Songbooks.

47. Contemporaries of the _Tatler_ and _Spectator_.

48. Samuel Richardson's Introduction to _Pamela_.


Ninth Year (1954-1955)

49. Two St. Cecilia's Day Sermons (1696-1697).

50. Hervey Aston's _A Sermon Before the Sons of the Clergy_ (1745).

51. Lewis Maidwell's _An Essay upon the Necessity and Excellency of
Education_ (1705).

52. Pappity Stampoy's _A Collection of Scotch Proverbs_ (1663).

53. Urian Oakes' _The Soveraign Efficacy of Divine Providence_ (1682).

54. Mary Davys' _Familiar Letters Betwixt a Gentleman and a Lady_
(1725).


Tenth Year (1955-1956)

55. Samuel Say's _An Essay on the Harmony, Variety, and Power of
Numbers_ (1745).

56. _Theologia Ruris, sive Schola & Scala Naturæ_ (1686).

57. Henry Fielding's _Shamela_ (1741).

58. Eighteenth Century Book Illustrations.

59. Samuel Johnson's _Notes to Shakespeare_. Vol. I, Comedies, Part I.

60. Samuel Johnson's _Notes to Shakespeare_. Vol. I, Comedies, Part II.


Eleventh Year (1956-1957)

61. Elizabeth Elstob's _An Apology for the Study of Northern
Antiquities_ (1715).

62. _Two Funeral Sermons_ (1635).

63. _Parodies of Ballad Criticism_ (1711-1787).

64. _Prefaces to Three Eighteenth Century Novels_ (1708, 1751, 1797).

65. Samuel Johnson's _Notes to Shakespeare_. Vol. II, Histories, Part
I.

66. Samuel Johnson's _Notes to Shakespeare_. Vol. II, Histories, Part
II.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Notorious Impostor and Diego
Redivivus, by Elkanah Settle

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTORIOUS IMPOSTOR, DIEGO REDIVIVUS ***

***** This file should be named 37517-8.txt or 37517-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/5/1/37517/

Produced by David Starner and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
