Project Gutenberg's The Exclusives (vol. 3 of 3), by Charlotte Campbell Bury

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: The Exclusives (vol. 3 of 3)

Author: Charlotte Campbell Bury

Release Date: October 13, 2017 [EBook #55746]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EXCLUSIVES (VOL. 3 OF 3) ***




Produced by Chris Whitehead and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









  THE
  EXCLUSIVES.

  VOL. III.




  THE
  EXCLUSIVES.

  IN THREE VOLUMES.

  VOL. III.

  SECOND EDITION.

  LONDON:
  HENRY COLBURN AND RICHARD BENTLEY,
  NEW BURLINGTON STREET.

  1830.




  LONDON:

  Printed by J. L. Cox, Great Queen Street,
  Lincoln's-Inn Fields.




THE EXCLUSIVES.




CHAPTER I.

THOUGHTS FOR COUNSEL.


When Lady Delamere returned with her niece, and the latter had been
left in a state of comparative composure to the best of all earthly
restoratives, sleep, Lady Dunmelraise listened with anxious interest
to the relation of her daughter's sudden indisposition, which Lady
Delamere did not hesitate to attribute to her having witnessed Lord
Albert's attentions to Lady Hamlet Vernon during the whole evening, in
the very box opposite to them at the Opera.

"I observed her," said Lady Delamere, "for some time struggling with
her feelings, and hesitated whether it were best to take notice of,
or allow them to subside uncommented upon: seeing, however, that at
length all her efforts were unavailing, and that her agitation rather
increased than the reverse, I judged it necessary to propose our
returning home. At that instant, Adeline fainted; and now, dear sister,
I think that, for Adeline's sake, it is my duty to speak to you without
reserve on the subject of Lord Albert D'Esterre. The state of your
health, on your arrival in London, and the fear of agitating you, have
alone prevented my touching on this subject sooner; but I hope you
will forgive me, and feel that I was right, when I acknowledge that I
have already spoken generally to Adeline herself upon the prospects
attendant on her engagement.

"You will also readily believe, I trust, that, knowing your sentiments
and principles, I could not say any thing that you would disapprove,
nor that I would assume to myself any parental authority, which is
alone your right, in what I said; but at the same time I ventured
upon what I conceived to be Lord Albert's very culpable neglect;
and, although I fear much more might have been said with truth, yet
my counsel went merely to impress on Adeline's mind a sense of the
seriousness of married life, and of the necessity of both parties
examining thoroughly the grounds on which they rest their hopes of
happiness, before they become bound indissolubly together. I also
expatiated upon the propriety of her mixing in the great world
during your stay in London, which would afford her an opportunity of
judging many things which she could not do in a life of retirement.
I added, that the same person is too often not the same, when placed
in different scenes, and with different objects of attraction and
temptation around him; for I wished to open Adeline's eyes to a clear
discernment of whatever might be necessary for her to know; and, having
done this, leave it to her own excellent understanding to draw the
salutary conclusion."

"You are right, my dear sister, and I thank you; but it is strange that
Adeline should never have mentioned this conversation to me. She never
had a secret from me before in her lifetime."

"Do not blame Adeline, I entreat you. If there be any blame any where,
it must rest with me; for dreading the effect which my suspicions might
have produced on your mind, while still suffering from your recent
increase of malady, I could not at that time bring myself to enter upon
a subject which I knew must harass you; and, acquainted as I am with
Adeline's superior prudence and rectitude of conduct,--qualities which
she possesses, indeed, beyond most persons of her age,--I deemed it
quite sufficient to give her that species of warning which would make
her look warily to certain points, respecting the observation of which
her very purity might have blinded her, but yet without saying any
thing sufficiently decided for her to deem it a breach of duty not to
repeat the conversation to you. Having explained this affair, I trust I
have absolved the dear, ingenuous Adeline from the least blame, which
might otherwise have attached to her concealing any thing of importance
from you, her mother."

"Oh certainly, my dear sister; entirely so; and it is needless to dwell
on this longer. The matter of great moment, which I wish to discuss
with you, is, what steps should now be taken in regard to Lord Albert
D'Esterre, for some active measure does appear necessary after this
night's occurrence?"

"Indeed it is a delicate business, and one on which I feel very
diffident in giving advice; but since you ask my opinion, I will not
conceal from you, that Lord Albert's character appears to me to be
much changed since his last visit to you, immediately after his return
from the continent: indeed, how should it be otherwise, when, by
all I can learn, he has associated only with those persons who form
a distinct circle; and amongst whom he must have imbibed, at least
superficially, all those habits and prejudices which are directly
opposed to his former life.

"You knew, my dear sister, that our opinion of that coterie is pretty
much the same; and I believe it to be impossible for a young man to
become entangled in such a society, and not lose all correct principle.
This in itself would be a reason which would make me anxious for our
Adeline's happiness, if she were so connected; for to what dangers
would she not be exposed as a married woman, living in that class of
persons! Notwithstanding her firmness of character, I could not but
dread the contamination of perpetual bad example; and the more so, as
it does not appear in its own appalling form, but wears the semblance
of elegance and innocent pleasure. Thinking of these things, and
knowing, as I do, besides, that not only Lord Albert attaches himself
in particular to one of the circle, (I mean Lady Hamlet Vernon) but
that the world are beginning to talk openly on the subject, I really
think it is time some decision on your part should be taken."

"All that you say makes me very sorrowful, my dear sister," replied
Lady Dunmelraise; "and I see too clearly the truth of your advice not
to follow it; but then, you know, we must consider the dear Adeline's
feelings; we must endeavour to spare her present pain, so far as we
consistently can with future and lasting happiness. But I fear, let the
blow come as it may, it will fall heavily on her. I have myself not
been without my suspicions, as I already told you, of Lord Albert's
change of sentiments in respect to my daughter; but knowing her deep
attachment to him, and dreading the effects of a hasty overthrow of
all her long-cherished hopes, having at the same time no positive
proof of Lord Albert's delinquency, I could do no more, hitherto,
than you have done; that is, speak in general terms of the very great
importance of a strict examination of oneself, and the object of one's
attachment, previously to marriage, not only in regard to the more
weighty considerations of principle and temper, but also in respect to
those habits and pursuits, which either cement the delights of daily
communication, or, if dissimilar, produce at first estrangement, and
in time, it may be, indifference or disgust. Of all these, and such
as these, I spoke minutely, and even ventured to throw out doubts
respecting Lord Albert's occupations and recreations continuing to be
of a nature that accorded with her own. I then hinted at a change of
associates naturally leading to a change of feelings; 'but,' I added,
'you are the only person, my dearest child, after all, who can decide
upon the truth of these observations in this instance; and what I
recommend to you is, to look narrowly yourself to these points, and
employ the interval before your final decision in determining this
momentous question for yourself.'

"Thus far I have spoken to her. Since, however, the scene of to-night
seems to have precipitated matters to a climax,--to the necessity, at
least, of a disclosure of the extent of our fears,--I must endeavour to
break them to her to-morrow in such a manner as will be least likely to
shock her feelings; but, alas! I much fear that the shock has already
been felt, has come to her in its worst and keenest guise, and on such
a heart as hers I dread the consequences. At her years the blight of a
cherished hope is often physically fatal; the frame is not strengthened
to bear the crush of sorrow, and life itself yields to the pressure."
Lady Dunmelraise's voice faltered, and her sister felt an answering
pang to that which she so touchingly expressed. "Still," resumed Lady
Dunmelraise, after a moment's pause, "it will be kinder and wiser, in
as far as respects addressing myself to Lord Albert, to let the matter
take its own course, and end itself. The time when a final decision
must be made is now very short; I shall then have a right to demand an
explicit avowal of his intentions, or to put a final termination to my
daughter's engagement with him.

"Meanwhile, I shall speak unreservedly to her. Now that she has (poor
dear! my heart bleeds for her!) witnessed, at least once, a scene
that confirms all my worst fears, she will be alive to the justice
of my representations, and with her own quickness of perception and
delicacy of feeling, will judge for herself on similar occasions,
should such recur; in which case, the dignity of her offended affection
will strengthen her for the trial: for what we take upon ourselves to
bear is always a burden more easily endured than that imposed upon
us by another. If, however, we should be mistaken; if, haply, we do
Lord Albert injustice; if appearances are deceptive, and that he is
in fact unchanged; we shall have spared much unnecessary pain, and
all self-accusation for undue precipitation." The sisters having thus
settled the point which involved the happiness of one so dear to them,
separated for the night.

Lord Albert D'Esterre, on his part, when he reached home from the
Opera, became the victim of those baffling feelings which had more
than once torn his heart in pieces; for although he felt that he had
stronger grounds than ever to suspect Lady Adeline of a preference
for another, yet so long and so deeply rooted had been his dream of
attachment for her, that at intervals a tide of tenderness returned,
and he involuntarily dwelt on the idea, that one who had been
considered by him as his own, one who professed to feel herself bound
to him, could not, without some fault on his part, prove false to
herself and him. And was he without fault in respect to his treatment
of her? It was a question he did not dare to answer; but he felt sure,
that whatever fancy played on the surface of his heart, Adeline _alone_
was enshrined there; and this assurance came to him with greater power,
as the excitement he experienced while he had been in the society of
Lady Hamlet Vernon gradually died away when no longer in her presence.

The next morning he wavered for a considerable time, whether to go in
person to inquire for Lady Adeline, or merely send; and his feelings
of wounded pride and genuine affection, which latter surpasses all
pride, alternately rose and fell in his breast. "I would not betray
displeasure," he said to himself; "for, if the offence is real,
displeasure would be too weak a feeling for so deep an injury, and,
to a coquette, the knowledge that she gives pain is a triumph: I will
not go, therefore; I will write." And he decided on despatching a
note, pleading important business as the cause of his not attending
personally to inquire for her, which excuse was in part true. After
having so far satisfied himself by doing what he thought best under all
circumstances, he went to Lord Glenmore's, to lose, if possible, the
sense of his sorrow, in matters of so high and engrossing a nature,
that he knew, could any thing prove a cure for love, they must.

Far different, however, from the feelings and thoughts which had
agitated the breast of Adeline, her affectionate relatives, and Lord
Albert himself, were those which agitated Lady Hamlet Vernon. She had
but one thought, one intense interest, and she cared not by what means
she followed up its success. In recalling the last scene in which she
had been an actor, she was not likely to lose sight for a moment of
the advantage she perceived that she had obtained over the object of
her pursuit; and although entertaining little doubt as to the cause of
Lady Adeline's indisposition, she was still anxious to assure herself
that her surmises were right in regard to it, and also to learn the
visible effect which had been produced when Lord Albert hastened to her
in the Opera House; for although she thought she could not be at a loss
to unravel the clue, yet, for a thousand reasons, she was most anxious
to be acquainted, beyond all possibility of doubt, with every thing
respecting the occurrence.

For this purpose, she sent a note, early in the morning, to Mr. Foley,
requesting him to lose no time in calling upon her. He was not tardy in
obeying her summons, and when he came, she cautiously avoided at first
entering upon the subject nearest her heart, and turned his attention
to the circumstance of a change of ministry, asking him if he had heard
any thing decisive on the subject. He repeated what had been reported
the preceding evening, namely, that Lord Glenmore had certainly
accepted office, and Lord Albert D'Esterre a post under him. This led
to the subject of Lady Adeline's indisposition, and the question,
whether the marriage between her and Lord Albert would ever take
place. Mr. Foley replied, that he thought the thing very unlikely. A
man engaged as Lord Albert now was, required, he conceived, a different
sort of wife, if any wife were not _de trop_.

"But what occasioned the scene she made last night?" asked Lady Hamlet
Vernon.

Mr. Foley replied, he thought there could be little doubt as to the
cause; adding, courteously, "You know Lord Albert was in your box all
the evening; and it could hardly be supposed, that any person at all
attached to him could see him engaged in earnest conversation with you
so long a time, without apprehension as to the consequences."

Lady Hamlet Vernon endeavoured to suppress, at least to conceal, the
agitation of pleasure which she felt; and said, smiling, he was always
a flatterer, but that there could be no foundation for the uneasiness
ascribed to Lady Adeline's feelings, and that she was sure there was
some other cause; but really, she added,

"My great interest was to ascertain that _your interests_ were safe in
this ministerial change; and if Lord Albert be really in power, I feel
certain you _have_ nothing to apprehend. As to Lady Adeline Seymour, I
am quite of your opinion; she is not at all calculated to be his wife.
From the interest which Lord Albert has shown in my welfare, I really
have a feeling of regard for him, and I should be sorry to see him
united to a woman who I am certain would not promote his happiness. Now
do _you_ think she would?"

"To confess the truth, I do not believe it. Lady Adeline is very
amiable, very sweet, very simple-minded, but not at all fitted to
play a part in the busy world. I could not imagine her the wife of a
minister, or throwing any degree of lustre round an exalted station.
Elegant and endearing in private life as she certainly is; depend upon
it _that_ is her sphere; take her thence, and she would be nothing."

Lady Hamlet Vernon seemed busy in thought, was silent for a few
moments, then turned to Mr. Foley, and fixing her eyes on his, asked
pointedly,

"But do you think she is fond of Lord Albert?"

"Fond! yes, perhaps so; the fondness of a child that has been told it
ought to love something, and has never made any comparisons whereby to
know what it likes."

"That will _not_ do for Lord Albert D'Esterre, I am certain, and it
would be madness in him to persevere in forming such a union. You, dear
Mr. Foley, are intimate with her mother, Lady Dunmelraise; does she
ever speak to you on the subject?" Then, without waiting for an answer,
Lady Hamlet Vernon went on to say, "If an opportunity _should occur_,
do you not think that, as a friend of the families, you ought to state
your opinion of this unpropitious marriage; I mean without prejudice
to Lord Albert D'Esterre, for I would not for the world be supposed to
say any thing which could be offensive or undervaluing in regard to
him. If you knew him intimately, which I hope you will do, you would, I
feel confident, not only like, but esteem him. It is from my doing so,
who have had opportunities of reading his real character, that I think
it a duty in any friend of Lady Dunmelraise to make her aware that
her daughter is not suited to him, from an opposition of tastes and
pursuits, different habits, and different ends in life, all which would
render a union between them destructive of mutual happiness."

During Lady Hamlet Vernon's conversation, Mr. Foley's countenance
underwent many changes, of which she was at first doubtful how to read
the meaning. At length, after a considerable pause, he replied--"Lady
Dunmelraise has never spoken to me on the business, and I do not see
how I could, with any propriety, touch on any part of the subject on
which we have been conversing, unless, indeed, she were first to open
the matter to me; besides," (he added, with increasing agitation,) "an
attempt of the kind, on my part, would most probably defeat the end, as
Lady Dunmelraise might suppose such advice, coming from me, was perhaps
influenced by wishes and views of my own, and I would not----."

"You would not," interrupted Lady Hamlet Vernon, "so far confess the
truth, for I see plainly that you yourself love Lady Adeline," keeping
her eyes on him as she spoke. Mr. Foley hesitated; he seemed to wish to
answer her, but knew not how.

"Now do not, my dear Mr. George Foley, from any false delicacy, be
desirous of concealing the truth from me: you do love Lady Adeline
Seymour; and if so, why should you not urge your suit? For _you_, I
conceive this alliance to be very desirable; it is quite different with
regard to Lord Albert D'Esterre. A quiet, simple, domestic companion,
such as you pourtray Lady Adeline to be, would prove exactly consonant
with your wishes; her fortune is vast; and the general tenor of her
education and life were well adapted to form her character to that
sort of tranquil obedience which I know you deem a prime requisite in
a wife. Lady Dunmelraise's interest in you is a great step in your
favour; fortune to you is a _great object_; and the marriage would be
such as would, I think, contribute to your wishes and your welfare."

Lady Hamlet Vernon saw that she had touched a theme in which Mr.
Foley's interests were deeply involved; for as she proceeded to
expatiate on the various advantages which would attend Mr. Foley's
adopting her advice, he listened with more and more attention, and even
betrayed the greatest apparent pleasure. Lady Hamlet Vernon marked
the progress she had made, and felt sure that the discovery at which
she had now arrived, of the coincidence of his feelings with her own,
laid a sure foundation for the accomplishment of her plans, while, at
the same time, it removed from herself, in a great measure, the danger
of being thought to be the principal mover in a matter which required
so much tact and delicacy to carry it through successfully: she saw
clearly, that it was only requisite, by following up her counsel to
Mr. Foley (which was in fact to confirm him in his own wishes), to
overcome any scruples which he might have entertained, from the fear
of appearing to act on selfish motives alone; and Lady Hamlet Vernon
was confident, from this conversation, that she had already made very
great progress. It had required only a spark to set the train on fire;
and she felt certain that every word she uttered would render him more
alive to the true state of his feelings, and consequently more apt to
betray them in his conduct towards Lady Adeline.

Lady Hamlet Vernon had too much knowledge of the world, and of human
nature, to press the matter further at the present moment, or to
attempt to bind, by any direct promise, a person who only required the
spring of his desires to be set in action, in order to play his own
part. Mr. Foley, too, seemed little inclined, at the present moment, to
enter any further on the subject, and by tacit consent it was suffered
to drop; but when he took leave of Lady Hamlet Vernon, it was only a
natural consequence of the counsel she had given him, that he should
bend his steps towards South Audley-street, to make his inquiries for
Lady Adeline. How easy is it for the stronger to direct the weaker mind
to good or evil, without exciting any suspicion in the latter that it
is assuming the mastery, or doing any thing but what it meant to do of
its own proper movement; and what small occurrences sometimes determine
a line of conduct either virtuously or the reverse!

Thus it was with Mr. George Foley in the present instance. It certainly
had crossed his mind more than once, that Lady Adeline Seymour would
make him a very eligible wife, and his affections (such at least as he
could have entertained for any object, _blazé_ and apathetic as he had
become from a long course of idleness and dissipation) had undoubtedly
been directed towards her; but the knowledge of the existing engagement
between Lord Albert D'Esterre and herself, and a certain apprehension,
frequent in timid minds that are neither quite good nor quite bad, lest
he should forfeit Lady Dunmelraise's protection, had always checked
his hopes, and kept these aspirations in subjection: but it required
only the suggestions of one somewhat less timid than himself on this
head, to direct his views to a determined pursuit of the object; and he
resolved, with proper caution, to feel his way, but, at the same time,
to lose no opportunity of following up Lady Hamlet Vernon's advice.




CHAPTER II.

A VISIT TO THE NEW-MADE MINISTER'S WIFE.


When Lord Albert had sent his note of inquiry to Lady Adeline Seymour,
he proceeded to Downing-street to meet Lord Glenmore, there to enter
on his official duties; and, notwithstanding the agitation of his mind
on other subjects, he went prepared to commence his new career with
that glow of ardour, which, when tempered by prudence, is so conducive
to honourable success. The reports which had so strongly prevailed for
the last two days in the great world, of Lord Glenmore's appointment
in the ministry, and of Lord Albert D'Esterre's being joined with him
in the office which he had accepted, were now confirmed by a public
announcement of the changes that had taken place.

Of course there were different opinions as to the eligibility of the
measures resorted to, as there always are in similar cases; but which
were, for the most part, formed according to the interests and wishes
of opposing parties, without any real feeling or care for the public
welfare: but, fortunately for the well-being of that public, there
are higher powers over-ruling the petty engines of mortal government,
and even the evil passions of mankind are sometimes made subservient
to the ways of Providence. Henry the Eighth, when he threw off the
papal yoke, and became an instrument of mighty and effective operation
in the religious and moral destinies of Britain, thought little of
any other end than that of securing his own illicit and ambitious
projects; but in his day and generation he was the appointed means to
bring about that invaluable constitution, which, resting on a firmer
basis than mere worldly wisdom could devise, we may be confident will
always have able defenders raised up for its support--whether they be
those who pursue worldly ends alone, and entertain no other dream in
their philosophy, or whether some hand of conscientious and religious
principle guide the helm: not that the choice of persons can therefore
be indifferent, for human means are still to be employed for human
measures; only that in this circumstance, as in all others, there
remains a point of confiding refuge to flee to, even when the political
horizon appears to good men overcast.

At the present season, when difficulties of an almost insurmountable
nature seemed to gather round the minister, and to impede the easy
course of government, the accession of such a man as Lord Glenmore,
whose character stood too high for any suspicion to attach to his
integrity, and whose situation was too independent to admit the surmise
of his being influenced by motives of personal interest, was a matter
of the last importance: the same might in a degree be said of Lord
Albert D'Esterre, with the exception that he was younger, and that this
was his first step in the career of his public life.

To Lady Tilney and her political friends, the recent changes were
certainly any thing but agreeable; for, so long as Lord Glenmore
remained unconnected with party, she considered that he was yet to
be gained over to that whose interests she espoused: and Lord Albert
D'Esterre having likewise taken the same course, was an additional
cause of regret to her; for she had looked upon him as a much
easier prize than the other, and one of nearly equivalent value. It
was therefore with unqualified disappointment that she heard the
confirmation of those fears which the current whisper of the preceding
days had not prepared her to receive with calmness.

On Lady Hamlet Vernon, this circumstance acted with a different
effect. When she heard the intelligence of the changes in the
ministry confirmed, she considered it as an additional circumstance
of self-congratulation, superadded to those which had arisen from the
occurrence at the Opera and her conversation with Mr. Foley. Lady
Hamlet Vernon, though ambitious, was a person attached to no party; and
though the love of power was predominant in her nature, it was for the
sake of its own exercise, without any reference to any political side
of the question: she only saw, therefore, in Lord Albert's appointment,
the first step towards a career which would involve him at once in
absorbing interests, and leave his mind more easy to be diverted into
a channel in accordance with her wishes, and more likely to be drawn
off from that attachment which was destructive of them. She thought
too, and with some probability, that it was a measure which would be
discordant with Lady Adeline's views of private happiness, and might
possibly therefore influence the fulfilment of the engagement between
her and Lord Albert D'Esterre.

Whilst the parties in question took these two opposite views of the
business, there was a third who deplored it in all sincerity of heart,
and already sickened under the idea of the protracted absences, and
the bustle of the public career, in which she was alternately either to
be the sufferer, or be called upon to share: with the sense, however,
of submission due in a wife to the interests and views of her husband,
she prepared to receive the congratulations of her friends, and to
fulfil the duties which she foresaw must attend on her situation, with
as much cheerfulness and alacrity as she could command.

Lord Glenmore having told her that concealment was no longer necessary
respecting the arrangements now finally adjusted, he bade her in
the course of the day acquaint her family with the event; and, on
his leaving her, she immediately communicated the intelligence to
her parents. The first to congratulate her was Lord Melcombe, who
considered the matter as a piece of good fortune, and rejoiced in this
addition to his child's happiness. While offering his fond wishes for
Lord Glenmore's success, he added, with a smile;

"I think, Georgina, he ought to be satisfied with your first _coup
d'essai_ in diplomacy, for you almost persuaded me yesterday that this
event was quite as improbable as my own appointment to office."

In the course of the day a host of friends--for what persons in power
ever lacked these?--called to pay their compliments to the wife of the
newly-created minister: some came from curiosity, some in sincerity,
some with envious feelings, and some with views of interest. Among
those of the latter class may be enumerated the Leinsengens, the
Tenderdens, and the Tilneys, with smiles on their lips and detraction
in their hearts; the one not believing Lady Glenmore's indifference
to her situation to be real, and the other two, who knew her better,
despising her for her childish folly.

"Well, my dear," said the Comtesse Leinsengen, entering her apartment
like a figure made of clock-work, that glides into the room on a stand,
"let me see how you do look under this _changement de decoration_;
just the same, I declare! _est il bien possible_?" Staring at her,
"_Tout cela ne vous fait ni froid ni chaud_--dat is _impossible_. _Au
reste_--you seem de very ting for your _poste, et je vous en fait mon
compliment_; for you will never be at a loss to know vat countenance
_tenir_, as yours does not undergo any change." The beautiful colour
which tinged Lady Glenmore's cheek at this speech proved the contrary,
as she replied;

"You are mistaken, Comtesse; there are many things which would affect
me in a lively manner; and indeed the present subject of your
congratulations is far from indifferent to me; but----."

"_Allons donc, une confidence_; at last we shall know what you do or do
not care for," interrupted the Comtesse Leinsengen.

"As far as that confidence goes, certainly. I do not care, for
instance, in the least, either for power or place, in as far as regards
myself, and I prefer a quiet country life to that of London; but as my
husband has considered it right to take this step, I must teach myself
to like it too." The announcement of Lady Tenderden and Lady Tilney
interrupted this uncongenial _tête-à-tête_; and the latter, to hide her
chagrin and disappointment under an apparent friendly zeal, flew up
to Lady Glenmore in her most energetic manner, and assured her, that
although she could never agree with Lord Glenmore in politics, yet from
personal regard she sincerely wished him joy of his public success,
and hoped, that now he had the ball at his foot, he would use it to a
good purpose. "It is one thing to be at the bottom of the ladder, and
another upon it," she added; "and perhaps we may see Lord Glenmore
doing as so many others have done before now, looking down on his old
prejudices and mistakes, and taking up quite a different view of the
subject."

Lady Glenmore was silent, but received Lady Tilney's expressions
of kindness with her usual sweetness and courtesy of manner. Lady
Tenderden joined in the congratulation.

"At length, my sweet lady," she said, "you are enthroned, and we all
come to do you homage. But how very discreet you were; never betrayed
by word, look, or gesture, the secret which you were quite sure of; you
are really cut out for the part you have to play. I envy you _votre
petite air moue et doucereux_; don't you, Lady Tilney?"

"Nothing can be better," she replied; "I prophesy that she will play
her part well."

"You are all exceedingly obliging," Lady Glenmore replied, "but I have
no part to play. My husband, being in the ministry, luckily does not
impose any duty upon me, besides that of living more in the world than
I might otherwise do."

"Poor lady, I pity you!" said Lady Tenderden ironically.

"You will change your ideas, I foresee that," said Lady Tilney
prophetically.

"You will remain just vat you are," said the Comtesse Leinsengen
impertinently, when the door opened, and the Duke of Mercington entered.

"I beg you to receive my warmest congratulation, my dear Lady
Glenmore," he said, approaching her in his most _empressé_ manner, as
if his whole heart was in his words, and bowing to the other ladies
slightly as he passed them. "I give you and Glenmore joy alike; him
that he has gained his wish, and you in the consciousness that he has
done so; for I know that your happiness must be _mutual_ to render it
really happiness."

"Oh, duke, I assure you all your compliments are trown away upon dat
ladi, on dat subject at least, for she declare not to like to be a
minister's wife at all."

"Impossible! she is joking," replied the duke, looking at Lady Glenmore
with one of those apparently ingenuous smiles which habit had forced
upon his features, and which once were captivating so long as they
_were_ natural; "impossible that you who were formed to shine in
society should shrink from a situation for which you are so singularly
well adapted."

"You are too good, duke, and I accept your flattering judgment upon
_credit_, for I have not been tried yet, and I _may_ disappoint you."

"Oh never, we all know how charming you are; don't we, Lady Tilney?"

"Yes, duke, you know we all bow to your judgment in every thing,
and I am sure we shall not begin to differ on _this_ point," she
replied, with an air of pique that was ill concealed under an affected
_bonhommie_.

"We are not come here," said the Leinsengen, whispering to Lady
Tenderden, "to listen to all his _fadaises_; _c'est le radotage_
dat we have been used to hear uttered by turns to every object of a
fresh _engouement_ for these last ten years." Then gliding up to Lady
Glenmore, she added, "I am quite charmed to see you _en des mains si
sures_, persons who vill give you such excellent advice; and now dat I
have rendered you _mes hommages_, I make _mes adieus_. Monsieur le duc,
I hope to see you at my next _levée_; Lady Glenmore of course; Lady
Tilney, _au revoir_." And then, when she reached the door, "_Ah ça_,
by de way, vill you, Lady Tenderden, go vid me to-night to _le théàtre
Français_?"

"I should be delighted, but I am engaged to Lady Glenmore. Is not this
our evening?" turning to the latter.

"Yes; but I beg you will not consider that binding."

"Oh but I do, though, so _you must go with me_."

"Of course," said the Comtesse Leinsengen contemptuously, "I am
extremely sorry, _mais il faut se consoler_;" and turning, she glided
away, but first whispered to Lady Tilney as she passed, "We shall have
nothing now but this tiresome _petite nouveauté_;" and she shrugged her
shoulders and departed.

"What is the matter with the comtesse?" asked the Duke of Mercington;
"that _air d'imperatrice enragée_ does not at all become her."

"No," replied Lady Glenmore, laughing, "I never knew any one that it
did."

"Some persons," rejoined the duke, "some dark beauties, may look well
under the effect of a storm, though I confess I had always rather see
the lambent flame than the forked lightning;" and he looked his implied
admiration of Lady Glenmore.

Lady Tilney did not know exactly what part to play in a scene where she
felt she was not the principal, although it is said there have been
times and seasons when she thought it politic to kiss _even the foot
of a person_ placed in a situation of imaginary greatness, and whose
favour she forgot herself so far as to court. She had come, however,
to Lady Glenmore with other views than either those of curiosity or
congratulation. Lady Tilney felt, that in the situation which Lady
Glenmore now held, she might with ease have led a party in society
independent of Lady Tilney or any of her coterie; and a fear that she
might take this step determined her on endeavouring, by counsel and an
assumption of directing how Lady Glenmore should conduct herself in her
station, to obtain in the first instance an influence over her, and
hold her in subserviency to her own wishes regarding society. She saw,
therefore, the Duke of Mercington and several others, who had come and
gone on the same errand, take their leave with satisfaction, and seized
the first moment when she was alone with Lady Glenmore to say:

"Now, my dear Lady Glenmore, you, I am sure, will believe, that of all
who have paid their court to you on this happy event, there is no one
more sincere than myself: but I will go a step further than any other
of your friends, though perhaps I may be giving you offence; I would
counsel, I would advise you; for yours, my dear Lady Glenmore, you will
find to be a situation of some delicacy: there will be so many ready
to take offence if you do not do all they ask or expect of you; and
yet, you know, you must not _compromettez_ yourself, nor our society;
you must, in short, be discreet, and not _too good-humoured_. It will
require great tact to please those whom I am sure you wish to please,
and to give offence to none. Now Glenmore will be constantly engaged,
and you cannot expect him to give due attention to these _affaires de
société_. I really wish, that if ever you feel in any difficulty, you
would consider me as your friend, always ready to serve you; apply
to me, and I will give you my best advice: there are many, I know,
who will be ready to do the same thing by you, but beware of those in
whom you repose confidence. For instance, between ourselves, there is
the Comtesse Leinsengen, who is very charming, very clever, but not
sufficiently aware _how our_ society must be constituted, as indeed
no foreigners possibly can or ever will be, and not at all capable of
guiding intricate points connected with it: and then, you know, she is
_diplomate_ by nature and art; she will of course endeavour to win you
to an intimacy. At least, _c'est son metiér_. But again, I say, beware
of this, or you will compromise Lord Glenmore as well as yourself.
Against Lady Tenderden, too, though there is nobody I like better, you
must also be upon your guard; for she is not altogether to be trusted,
and she will betray your secrets from habit."

Lady Glenmore, who had, hitherto, listened to this long harangue in
silence, and without showing any emotion, now looked a little surprised
at this last caution given by Lady Tilney, for she remembered the
opinion her husband had pronounced on Lady Tenderden; but still she
said nothing. The expression, however, which played in her countenance,
was not unobserved by Lady Tilney, as she added, "Oh, I know what _you_
are thinking; Lady Tenderden _is_ a great favourite with Lord Glenmore;
but it's an old friendship, and now he is married, of course all that
will be on another footing."

Lady Glenmore blushed, and felt the tears rising to her eyes, at the
renewal of an insinuation respecting her husband, which had once
before cost her much acute pain. Lady Tilney did not choose to observe
the effect which she saw her words had produced on the innocent Lady
Glenmore, and proceeded to object, in rotation, to every one whom she
thought might become powerful rivals in her influence over her. Then,
having proceeded to discuss every point political and influential
in society, and having persuaded Lady Glenmore to fix an early day
for a _cercle choisie_ at her house, and canvassed the pretensions of
the persons who were to be allowed to form it, she at length took her
departure, leaving Lady Glenmore perfectly overcome with the torrent of
eloquence and advice which she had so gratuitously given.

While these empty insincerities, these crooked policies of polite life,
had been passing under Lady Glenmore's roof, and while Lord Albert
D'Esterre was busied in the graver but perhaps not less intricate and
deceptive details of _public_ affairs, the realities of whose endless
mazes he had that morning for the first time entered upon, Lady
Dunmelraise, in a far different scene, and on a far other occasion, was
preparing for one of the most painful tasks that duty demands of true
affection; that of probing the breast of a beloved object, with the
moral certainty of its being right so to do, in the hope of protecting
it from yet more cruel wounds. These are the heroisms of private life,
which pass unknown and unhonoured by the world, although they are
noted elsewhere, and are of frequent occurrence in the annals of daily
existence; and it was under the pressure of this painful determination
that Lady Dunmelraise passed a sleepless night, endeavouring to prepare
herself for to-morrow's duty.

When she met her daughter at breakfast, her pale and altered
countenance half spoke the nature of her intended counsel before
she gave it utterance. Lady Adeline's own feelings were too much in
accordance with her mother's, for her not to read the cause of the
expression she saw painted on her face; and although she had forced
herself to leave her apartment, and to appear at the usual hour, and
even endeavoured to wear her own placid smile, in order not to give
Lady Dunmelraise unnecessary anxiety, still the very endeavour betrayed
the real state of her heart. The business of the breakfast passed
mechanically and in silence, with the exception of an interchange of
those few kindly monosyllables which convinced them mutually of the
participation each took in the other's anguish; and while Lady Adeline
was trying to suppress starting tears, Lady Dunmelraise determined to
break this cruel silence, and without preamble to come at once to the
subject.

"My dearest Adeline, I need not tell you, love, that I feel with you
the sorrow and mortification of the occurrence of yesterday evening;
and it has come with double force on me, seeing the anguish it has
brought upon you. However much I may have been prepared for it by what
I have observed in Lord Albert's altered manner, yet I confess I am
surprised at the want of openness in his conduct, a want with which
I never should have thought he could have been charged. Love, it is
true, is easily directed into a new channel, unless religious principle
confirm it in its original course; but even where there is no sin,
according to the world's acceptation of sin in such change, still, from
the opinion I have hitherto entertained of his natural disposition,
I thought he would, with that ingenuousness of character for which I
have given him unbounded credit, have at least confessed the truth
openly; a line of conduct which, had he adopted, I am confident that,
however heavily the avowal might have fallen on your heart, there
would yet have remained a consolation in thinking that he was still
worthy of your esteem, and then an honest pride of the consciousness of
self-desert would have come in aid to sustain you to bear up against
desertion. I begin, however, to fear that esteem can have no part in
our sentiment towards him; for why should concealment be necessary,
if, at least, the cause of his estrangement from us were worthy of
himself?" Lady Adeline covered her face with her hands, as she rested
her arms on the table before her, and her tears trickled through her
delicate fingers, but she could not speak. "Calm yourself, my dearest
Adeline; for my sake, for your own sake, for resignation's sake, bear
up under this heavy affliction: it is a sore and early trial for you, I
well know; but if rightly entertained, it will bring its blessing with
it, as all our trials do. I do not mean to pretend that you are not to
suffer, or give a cold unfeeling philosophy to still the throbbings of
a young wounded heart; but I would lead you to sources of consolation,
which, although they may seem harsh and bitter at first, will in time,
and with God's blessing, have a beneficial effect."

"I know," replied Lady Adeline, making an effort to speak, "I know,
dearest mamma, that all you say is meant in love, and is balm to me,
but these tears, these sobs, must have their course."

Lady Dunmelraise replied to this natural appeal with answering tears;
and having first regained composure, she went on to say:

"Think for a moment, my best child, how hopeless, how truly wretched,
would have been your situation, had you, when united to Lord Albert,
discovered, when it was too late, that his affections were not
entirely yours; and that he had, on his part, either from motives of
false delicacy, or, from what was still worse, a desire to possess your
fortune, persisted in fulfilling an engagement in which his heart at
best had a divided interest;--think, dearest, what would have been your
feelings in _such_ a case, and how mercifully you are dealt by in the
present suffering, in comparison of the irremediable sorrow which would
then have been your portion!

"I need not now recall to your mind what I said on Lord Albert's
apparently altered state of feelings on our arrival in town. You, I am
certain, saw the change as well as myself, and felt it,--how deeply,
I hardly can bear to think; though we both seemed tacitly to agree,
that it would be better to await the result, than precipitate it by
any premature remarks, either to himself, or between each other.
And indeed this conduct, in a great measure, it is still my opinion
should be preserved; only, in as far as regards ourselves, my dearest
child, neither my sense of duty, nor my sense of sorrow, will permit
of longer silence on a subject which, I grieve to confess, judging by
appearances, is already settled; and it is with a view to prepare you
for such an issue, rather than to direct you to show any alteration
in your conduct towards Lord Albert, that I have thus spoken: when I
say show _no_ alteration, it is impossible that that advice could be
literally followed, after having seen a person avowedly under the most
sacred engagement to yourself pass the entire evening in the society
of another, whose general character will not authorize the supposition
that such attentions were without an especial object, and that too on a
day on which he had pleaded important business as his excuse for your
not seeing him; but what I mean by your showing no alteration of manner
towards him is, that neither our opinions nor our decisions should be
made known to him in this stage of the business."

Lady Adeline had now mastered herself sufficiently to listen with
calmness to all her mother said; and she had drawn a seat near her, and
held Lady Dunmelraise's hand tenderly in hers, replying by a gentle
pressure to the sentiments she uttered: and now, when she could again
give her thoughts utterance, she said:

"Speak on, dearest mamma, for even my rebel heart is soothed by
listening to your gentle voice."

Lady Dunmelraise continued, "There are many reasons, you see, love, for
this line of conduct:--

"In the first place, we have only, my sweet child, our own observations
and surmises to guide us; and although these, I grant, are strong,"
(Lady Adeline sighed heavily in answer to this remark) "yet to act upon
them would look like forcing Lord Albert to an immediate decision,
a step unwise, and unworthy of us, and whichever way it ended would
leave a doubt whether the decision were entirely from his heart or
not. Besides, as yet he may have erred, and perhaps become penitent;
if so, his own spontaneous confession alone could be a surety for
his sincerity. Then too, my love, I must also remind you, that by
nothing do a young woman's prospects suffer so much, on her first
entry into life, as by becoming the object of the world's observation
and idle talk, especially on the subject of a disappointment in love
or marriage. All that the generality of the world know at present,
concerning the existing engagement between yourself and Lord Albert,
is, that your dear father and his parents having considered that you
were by birth, fortune, and apparently by disposition when children,
united to each other; should you grow up, mutually entertaining the
same affection which you then evinced, that in such a case your union
would be a matter of congratulation to the families of both parties.
In short, it was one of those alliances that are often talked of
amongst children seemingly adapted to each other, but to be finally
dissolved or fulfilled, as circumstances should hereafter decide.

"How far your own affections have become bound up in this engagement,
or how far Lord Albert has proved himself worthy or not of the intended
union, is hitherto a matter wholly unknown, and uncared for, by the
world at large: but now, however, that you are in the scene of London,
young, new, and with various extraneous advantages to excite envy,
if the affair were made a topic of discussion, the ill-natured part
of the community will be too glad to seize upon any _esclandre_ that
might answer them for a nine days' novelty; and such a hazard, your own
delicacy will point out to you, is therefore carefully to be avoided.
Till lately, the happy termination of our wishes had seemed probable,
and you, dearest child, have, I fear, given way to the belief that it
was impossible it should fail: but, however painful it may be to us
both, in the several relations in which we stand implicated in this
business, it is, you will allow, some satisfaction to think, that the
sacredness of these feelings will not necessarily be broken in upon by
a vulgar prying public; and that, in short, the world need know no
more of the matter than what I have already stated.

"We have only, therefore, as I before remarked, to await the period
when decision must of course be made; that will be when we are in
the country, and when we shall escape all the unpleasant remarks
which would take place were we actually on the scene. Let me hope
also, dearest Adeline, that your eyes being self-opened to the
disappointment, you will know where to seek for succour against
yourself, and which alone can enable you to bear the blow, come when it
may."

"Indeed, dearest mamma," said Lady Adeline, with that under tone of
voice that seems to fear its own sound, "whatever pain I endure, I
perfectly agree with you in all you have said, and implicitly yield to
your counsel; not only because it is my duty and interest to do so, but
because I see the matter exactly in the same light. Oh, I could have
borne all, had Albert only been more open and honest with me: but why
was he so cruel as to deceive me? why was he so tenderly affectionate
to me at Dunmelraise, after his return from abroad? why did he write to
me so kindly? why has he, since we have been in London even, made such
constant allusions to past and future happiness? Why all this, and
then so suddenly and cruelly neglect me for another? for I am sure he
does love another; mamma, do you not think he does?"

"Alas! what comfort can I give you? You have seen with your own eyes,
and I must refer you, love, to your own feelings; who can so well tell
all things as they?"

"But, dearest mamma, do you not think, that if he really did love
another he would have told me so?"

"Why, dearest, it is difficult to reply to that question. Albert's good
feelings and principles could not be overthrown at once. It is never
thus. In a vicious career, people become unprincipled and hardened by
degrees. He may have found his heart estranged from you, and yet in the
first instance have been ashamed to own it, even to himself. The first
step to evil is the _deceitfulness_ of sin: with how many subterfuges
does it not conceal its true nature: it blinds the eyes, lest, looking
upon its native deformity, it should terrify its victim. There is
nothing so likely to have this fatal tendency, as the constant society
and intercourse with persons whose conduct, if not licentious (though I
fear too many of them deserve that epithet), is yet not guided by any
fixed or determined principle of action; whose lives at best are spent
from day to day without any serious thought, and without regard to any
thing but selfish indulgence. Albert has great influence, and there may
be more reasons than one why the party with whom he seems at present to
associate should wish to entangle him. I augured ill of his happiness
from the moment I heard of the circle in which he lived; and it came
to me with as much surprise as sorrow, for I never could have thought
to find one of his dispositions and habits (setting aside principle)
making such a choice of society. This it is which leads me to suppose
that some stronger power of evil than a mere love of idle pleasure has
lured him into the danger. But let this be your greatest comfort, that
you are not his wife, and are not to be thrown among persons of such
a stamp as his present associates; for whatever worldly advantages
they may possess, I should tremble for you, my dear child, were you
cast into a situation of such imminent peril to reason and to virtue.
A woman, to a certain extent, must mingle with the associates of her
husband; and such as these are, so in time must become, likewise, her
own character: for however incongruous they may be to her tastes and
feelings at first, yet if she is young, inexperienced, and pliant, the
brilliancy and polish of their exterior, and their whole attractions,
must dazzle and mislead her better judgment; and from the idea alone of
pleasing her husband, in as far as virtue and religion do not seem to
forbid it, she will conform herself to the habits and manners of those
around her, not being aware how these re-act again upon the general
tone of her own character."

"But perhaps," said Lady Adeline timidly, and while a feverish flush of
hope and tenderness deepened in her cheek, "perhaps, were I his wife, I
might reclaim----."

"Ah, dearest child," interrupted Lady Dunmelraise, "never hazard
evil that good may come of it; never rely upon such a precarious
contingency, nor upon your own strength; seek not temptation,--that is
presumptuous. Were you indeed his wife--as there is every reason at
present to be thankful you are not--then would have come the duty of
_that_ trial; but now another is appointed you, my love. Let us take
what is, and think only of that. We must not wilfully rush into danger,
to indulge selfish gratification."

Lady Adeline threw herself into her mother's arms, and wept
unrestrainedly. "My dearest child, it has been a painful task to me to
give you pain. Soothe this anguish, I beseech you, and assist me in
the performance of what I feel is my duty, by regaining as much command
over yourself as you possibly can."

While Lady Dunmelraise was yet speaking, a servant brought in a note
addressed to Lady Dunmelraise: it was from Lord Albert. She opened,
and having read it, gave it to Lady Adeline, who had known by its
very twist who it came from, and was in breathless anxiety to see its
contents.

"It is worded kindly," said Lady Dunmelraise, "but he could not do
otherwise; and at the same time, I dare say, he felt much awkwardness,
and did not know how to come in person. I shall answer it, my love, in
the same spirit of gentleness; merely saying you are quite recovered,
only suffering the remains of languor after the sickness produced by
the heat of the Opera last night. And if Lord Albert should call in the
course of the day, do, I entreat you, betray no unusual symptoms of
agitation."

Lady Adeline, with an aching head and still sobbing breath, promised
acquiescence; and in despite of herself, a ray of hope seemed to
emanate from the note, which cheered her, she scarce knew why, and
enabled her to suppress her emotion. Then retiring to her own chamber,
she there sought in prayer that strength and resignation which she knew
no earthly comforter could bestow on her.

After the exhaustion of spirits which this conversation with her
daughter had produced, Lady Dunmelraise felt the promised visit of
her sister would be a cordial to her; nor did she wait long ere Lady
Delamere came. As soon as the latter was made acquainted with what had
passed, she said, "Dear Adeline! I expected this from her; yet her
behaviour is super-eminently amiable on this occasion, and must reward
you for all your sorrows. I perfectly agree with you on the policy of
the line of conduct you are to adopt with Lord Albert; and in pursuance
of this, should you not call upon the Tresyllians? You know they are
arrived."

"Certainly I will; for although my health has for many years precluded
my mixing with the world, and exonerated me from all visiting, I shall
forego my general rule, and call on them without delay."

"Come with me now," said Lady Delamere; "my carriage is at the door,
and I will bring you home again." To this proposal the sisters agreed,
and they departed together. The Tresyllians were not at home, and
Lady Dunmelraise felt glad to escape the meeting. On her return, she
learnt from Adeline, whom she found admirably serene and composed,
though pale, and with her eyes swollen with weeping, that Lord Albert
had not been there. The fact was, that the latter had been in reality
occupied the whole day; and it was only on his return to his house,
late in the afternoon, that he received Lady Dunmelraise's answer to
his note, his mind having been as it were forcibly taken off from
the subject nearest to his heart. He had profited by that wholesome
constraint which the occupations of men afford them, and prevents that
musing of the tenderer feelings which enervates and unfits for useful
exertion. Something like reason, and the distinct perception of things
which it never fails to bring in its train, had consequently resumed a
sway over him; and, when this was the case, his heart could not avoid
turning to the object of its first pure and honourable affection with
that ineffable sweetness of sensation that attends on innocent and
happy love. Then, half forgetting, half scorning, the suspicions he
had entertained, and which the scene of the preceding evening had but
too plausibly confirmed, he determined to call in South Audley-street
to see Lady Dunmelraise at least, if not Adeline; and as he walked
along, absorbed in mingled feelings that made him insensible to all the
noise and bustle of the busy crowd he passed through, he found himself
quickly at the door: his hand was on the knocker, when a cabriolet
drove up, and out of it stepped Mr. Foley.

All Lord Albert's philosophy was overthrown by this incident; all
his love for and trust in Lady Adeline was destroyed; and his first
impulse was to leave a house in which he conceived he had no longer any
interest in seeking its inhabitants. But, the next moment, his better
judgment, if not his pride in not seeming to yield to a successful
rival, determined him to fulfil his first intention; and making rather
a cold and haughty return to Mr. Foley's salutation, they both entered
the door together.




CHAPTER III.

THE FRENCH PLAY.


It was late when Lady Glenmore returned from Lady Melcombe's; and as
she drove home she pleased herself with the idea of talking over with
her husband the insipid and insignificant scene of the morning, as well
as losing in his society the recollection of those uneasy feelings
respecting Lady Tenderden, which Lady Tilney's allusion to past times
had created: and then glowed in her breast the one natural, honest
hope, which was ever uppermost in Lady Glenmore's heart, of meeting her
husband for the simple, single pleasure she enjoyed of _being in his
presence_.

"Is Lord Glenmore come home?" was her first question when she alighted
from her carriage: the "No" was chilling.

"Did he leave any message? has he sent any note?" Still "No, no,"
sounded heavily in her ears. She prepared, however, for his return,
by taking more pains with her toilette than usual; and when she had
finished arraying herself, not according to the code of the _Belle
Assemblée_ or _Feuilles des Modes_, but in accordance with that of her
own young innocent face, her glass told her she had not done so in
vain. She then sat for some time with tolerable patience, first taking
up one book, then another, then throwing them down again; going to the
instrument, touching a few chords; turning over the ornamented leaves
of a Lilliputian music-book, invisibly written with a crow-quill;
pushing it away, leaving it to tumble down off the desk as it might,
and going to the window, the shutters of which she had not allowed the
servant to close, in order that she might listen to every cabriolet
that passed. At length she rang the bell, and was told that it was
eight o'clock.

"Is there no message from Lord Glenmore?" "No, my lady. Shall dinner be
served?" "No--yes--no--yes; bring up something, any thing is enough;"
and away she went to her splendid board in her splendid apartment, with
a train of liveried domestics, to sit down to a lonely dinner with an
aching heart. She hastily dismissed the servants, and then leaning back
on her chair, and suffering the tears that were choking her to flow
over her face--

"I wish we were poor, and he not political," she said, sobbing; "I
should not then be left alone, I should not be absent from him." A
servant entered with a note. She endeavoured to conceal her tears, and,
hastily opening it, read a few kind words from Lord Glenmore, which
spoke his regret at being prevented from meeting her at dinner; and
hoping she would go early to the French play with Lady Tenderden, where
he would join them if possible. The ebb and flow of young feelings
are very quick; and this note was such a cordial, that, as she ran up
stairs, she carolled in the gaiety of her altered feelings: so soon had
she forgot disappointment in anticipated pleasure.

In a few minutes more she was in her carriage on the way to the French
play. When she came into the box, she found it empty, and the play
begun. Lady Tenderden was not arrived; and by the time she had cast a
glance round the house, bowed to some of her acquaintance, and settled
her shawls, &c., she turned all her attention to the stage. It was a
play which had collected a class of audience seldom frequenting that
house; for it was one of those sterling comedies of Molière's, apart
from his too frequent grossness, which, with the true legitimate
intention of comedy, lashed the follies of the age for which it
was written, and was not without its prototype in the present. _Les
Précieuses Ridicules_ is a play that all unsophisticated natures must
enjoy, even those who, as in the case of Lady Glenmore, were not
acquainted with the times and the persons it was written to satirize;
and she herself evinced the pleasure she derived from it, by laughing
naturally and frequently. Her merry laugh called the observation of
several persons, not accustomed to see pain, or pleasure, or amusement,
ever expressed by any outward sign, and who attributed to the
uneducated only such marks of unconstrained nature; but others, again,
(some few), were pleased at any thing so unlike what they generally
beheld; and it conveyed to _them_ a reflected sensation of freshness of
enjoyment, such as they remembered to have felt when life was new, and
before they were schooled by the false fastidious system of the world
of ton, or _blazéd_ to the zest of pleasure.

"What a pity," observed Lord Baskerville, speaking between his teeth,
in his company voice, "that that very pretty Lady Glenmore should make
herself so conspicuous."--He was in the Comtesse Leinsengen's box,
within one of that in which Lady Glenmore was sitting.

"Not at all," replied Mr. Spencer Newcombe; "she only draws attention;
and one cannot look at a prettier woman."

"_Peut-être_," said the Comtesse Leinsengen, "she does it for dat very
purpose, and takes dis new way of being _distingué_."

"Insufferable!" rejoined Lord Baskerville; "if she were as beautiful as
an angel, she would disgust me with those _roturière_ manners."

"I believe," said Mr. Leslie Winyard with a yawn, "that I must really
take compassion on her, and give her some good advice on the subject of
education."

"_L'affaire est faite_," rejoined the comtesse, "if you take her
_en main; mais tout est pour le mieux dans ce meilleur des mondes
possibles_."

Having thus settled the matter in Lady Tilney's box, Mr. Leslie Winyard
proceeded to that of Lady Glenmore, there to commence his destined
essay on education. "I am delighted," he said, "to see you in such good
health, and so intent on immortalizing Molière. If he could only know
what homage you are paying his talents in these expressions of your
mirth, how delighted he would be!"

"Hush," said Lady Glenmore, "I will talk presently; but now I want to
listen to the play--it is so amusing."

"So it is," he replied; "and I am glad to be with any one so natural,
and so much of my own way of thinking. I will, if you allow me, occupy
this place," taking the front seat, "and we will enjoy the thing
together."

"Certainly," said Lady Glenmore, with a pleased expression of
countenance, which, though he knew better than to ascribe its influence
to himself, he was yet gratified to think that others might do so;
and while she continued intent on what was passing on the stage, Mr.
Winyard was busily looking round, _à-la-derobée_, to see what remarks
were passing on his being alone with the new minister's wife. This,
however, was a privilege which he did not long enjoy; for Lord Raynham
and Mr. Spencer Newcombe came in to make their bows and give their meed
of homage. After having courteously received them, Lady Glenmore turned
again to the stage, and they went on talking in an under tone together
at the back of the box.

"I wish," said Lord Raynham, addressing Mr. Spencer Newcombe, "I wish
that we had any dramatist as clever now-a-days to lash our follies."

"Do you think you would like it if you had?" asked his friend.
"Somehow or another, for my own part, I feel I get on just as well
without, and I suspect I am too old to be whipped. Depend upon it,
the reason why we are so well amused with this and some of the other
comedies of Molière is, because we think we are only laughing at
another generation, and another nation, whose _ridicules_ have nothing
in common with our own. No, no; believe me, we English do not like to
be satirized; we can bear it less well than any other nation I know.
Broad farce is our _sauce piquant_; but the exact delineation of our
peculiar vices and follies would not be well received, and indeed I
doubt if legitimate comedy, however well acted or written, would go
down at all."

"My good friend," said Lord Raynham, "this very piece is not so widely
different from the follies of the present day as you may at first sight
imagine."

"Perhaps so," replied his friend; "but one need not put on the cap, you
know; and then nobody can tell whether it fits or not."

Lord Raynham continued (following the thread of his own fancy, rather
than replying to the speaker, as was his wont), "Change the names and
the modes of _Les Précieuses Ridicules_ to those of a certain set
existing now-a-days, and the principle of vanity and folly is much the
same in both; only that, perhaps, on the whole, those of the Hôtel de
Rambouillet were more to women's advantage after all; and had they
not pushed their system too far, it might have lasted longer than the
present dynasty of _ton_ is likely to do. Both are entirely false, both
equally far from the real, nay, genuine charm of true good society.

"However, in all the freaks that vanity and fashion play, there have
been, and ever will be, some redeeming characters, who mix with all the
_fanfaronnade_ of the day, and yet remain uninfected with the epidemic
follies. She, for instance," indicating Lady Glenmore with a look; "can
any thing be more young and fresh, in mind and heart as well as years,
more gay, more natural?"

"Certainly not; and it is quite invigorating to witness her
unsophisticated manners, and the genuine entertainment she derives from
that which she is come professedly to be diverted by; but then the
more's the pity, for it will not last long thus."

"Do not forebode evil," replied Lord Raynham, who was in one of his
best _couleur de rose_ humours; "remember there were, and are, among
the _précieuses ridicules, depuis tout les temps, des Mesdames de
Sevigné et de Connel_, and I forget all their names, who retained
their own innocent individuality, and their natural grace of mind, amid
the most decided affectation and the most ridiculous pretensions."

"Yes, but they were exceptions to general rules; and I do not augur so
well of that one," still meaning Lady Glenmore, "under the care of that
_Alcoviste_," alluding to Mr. Leslie Winyard.

"Is not that Lady Tilney sitting alone in her box?" asked Lord Raynham:
"I must go make my obeisance, as in duty bound, or I may chance to
be discarded; and as we have no Molière to overturn our Hôtel de
Rambouillet[1], we had better keep its door open to us."

[Footnote 1: Vide Molière's Preface to Les Précieuses Ridicules.]

"Agreed," said Mr. Spencer Newcombe; and, bowing to Lady Glenmore,
they departed, leaving Mr. Leslie Winyard tenaciously keeping his
conspicuous place, with cane at lip, and glove in hand, and eyes
that were gathering the observations passed upon him with lynx-like
sharpness, while they seemed half closed in listless or consequential
apathy. In a few minutes after, the curtain dropped.

"Oh!" said Lady Glenmore, "I am so sorry it is over! I do not know when
I have been so amused."

"I, too, am sorry it is over; but _amused_ is not exactly the
explanation I should give of the _cause of my regret_;" and he
endeavoured that his eyes should explain what he _did_ mean.

"No!" said Lady Glenmore with perfect _naiveté_; "then perhaps you have
seen the play often before, and have been looking at the company, not
at the stage?"

"Did you ever play at the game called Magical Music?" asked Mr. Leslie
Winyard; "and if so, and that I were the performer on the instrument, I
should now touch it _forte fortissime_, for you are very near guessing
the truth."

"I do not understand you," said Lady Glenmore, still unconscious of
his drift, and her attention caught by some one who was entering, and
causing a considerable stir. She hoped it was Lord Glenmore, which made
her ask suddenly what o'clock it was. "I am sure," she added, "it must
be very late, and I fear Lady Tenderden is not coming; and Glenmore,
too, said he would come; but I begin to be afraid they _neither_ of
them will;" and her countenance changed, and another spirit than that
of girlish amusement took possession of her, and she became silent,
overcast, and disquieted.

"Were they to come _together_?" asked Mr. Leslie Winyard, insidiously
laying a peculiar emphasis on the last word.

"Oh no!--that is to say, not that I know of. Lady Tenderden did not
tell me so." Mr. Leslie Winyard half smiled, and then, as if checking
himself, he rejoined carelessly, "Oh! you know these diplomatists are
the most slippery fellows imaginable; that is their trade: they are so
taken up with the affairs of the nation, they forget all other affairs.
But it _is_ odd that Lady Tenderden also should have forgotten her
engagement to you."

Lady Glenmore made no reply, but she became more and more uneasy: her
colour went and came "like colours o'er the morning skies." She looked
anxiously around, and started at every step that seemed to pass the
door of her box, but yet, remembering certain lessons she had received,
she contrived to keep under her uneasiness.

"Is there any thing I can do?" said Mr. Leslie Winyard, with an air of
interest and concern. "I am afraid you are not well. Would you like
to go home? I dare say my carriage is at the door, if yours is not
arrived, and that you would do me the honour to accept it."

"Oh no!" she replied; "I am equally obliged to you, but I shall await
the end of the performance."

Mr. Leslie Winyard now thought it was necessary to use all his art,
to draw off her attention from the subject that engrossed it, and, if
possible, fix it on himself.

"I am not apt," he said, "to be often in good-humour with myself; in
truth, I have not much reason; but I am half inclined to suppose there
must be some redeeming clause in my composition, for I have frequently
observed that, after an hour or two of this sort of thing, you grow
restless and weary, and I declare I always feel the same. I plume
myself mightily in having discovered this similarity between us."

"Pardon me, you are quite mistaken. I am often exceedingly well
diverted in public; and when Lord Glenmore is with me," and she
blushed, as if she had said something she ought not, "I am generally
well pleased to stay late, for I am never sleepy."

Mr. Leslie Winyard thought that it was more troublesome to counteract
nature by art, than overcome art itself by art, as he replied,

"Oh! certainly, I understand that; but what I meant to say was, that
it is not these scenes which afford one any real happiness; it is
the society of a few friends, a selection of persons who suit each
other, and who like the same things, and who are occupied in the
same interests. For instance, how very much more enchanting it is to
be singing a duet with you, than sitting at an opera, hearing the
artificial execution of those who sing by profession! for surely the
true intention of music is, that it should express our own feelings,
and transport us into a sort of half-beatific state, such as that
expressed by your '_Sempre più t'amo_.'"

All this sentimental jargon, so different from the real nature of the
speaker, was accompanied by those glances of admiration which spoke a
much plainer language than even his words; but though the innocent Lady
Glenmore was as yet unaware of their tendency, and did not see through
the artificial refinement which Mr. Leslie Winyard thought it worth his
while to assume, in order to induce her to listen to him at all, there
was, nevertheless, a secret sense of genuine purity in her heart, which
made her dislike the license of his gaze; and she answered, fixing
her eyes on him with all the composure of perfect innocence, "It is
very delightful to me to go to the Opera; and the perfect finish of
the singing of professional people teaches me to improve my own. I am
much obliged to you for the compliment; but I assure you, if you only
heard me sing with my master, you would acknowledge that it is quite a
different thing from what it is when I sing with you, for I was always
afraid of putting you out, and that spoiled the little power I have."

This speech certainly did _put him out_, and in his heart Mr. Leslie
Winyard cursed what he called her _niaiserie_; but he determined
that, sooner or later, he would be revenged. Concealing, however, his
mortification, he replied, "You were too good to consider me in any
way; but I am sure nothing that you could do would ever give me a
feeling of displeasure, whatever it might do of regret." He modified
the expression of his eyes as well as that of his words, and entered
with her into a long comparison of the charms of Paris and London in
their respective societies and manners, which engaged her attention;
and she listened with great complacency for some time, during which
he had continued to move his chair nearer and nearer her own, and to
appear to the public to be deeply engaged in the most interesting
conversation, while, at the same time, he succeeded in allaying any
discomfort she might have felt at his own too-marked admiration,
previously shown, by turning her attention into a totally different
channel, and determining to reserve a more open avowal of his
sentiments for a more favourable and distant period, when suddenly the
box door opened. Lady Glenmore started forward with an exclamation of
surprise and pleasure, supposing it to be her husband; but in this she
was mistaken, for Lady Tenderden entered alone.

"I beg your pardon, my _dear ladi_, for being so late," said the
latter; "but you know how impossible it is to get away in any time
from a dinner party"--[the _impossibilities_ of a fine lady are to be
understood with certain modifications and meanings which do not belong
to the literal signification of the word]--"and I regret being detained
on all accounts;" Lady Tenderden went on to say, "first, because I have
lost your society; then, for the sake of de play, which of all things I
wanted to have seen: but you have been amused, I hope?"

"Oh, exceedingly!" replied Lady Glenmore; and then her countenance
was overcast again at her husband's absence, and she sighed heavily,
so that Lady Tenderden hardly knew what to think, and for a moment
began to suppose that she had arrived inopportunely, and disturbed
a _tête-à-tête_; but then, again, remembering the character of Lady
Glenmore, she only turned to Mr. Leslie Winyard, and whispered, in
allusion to a circumstance connected with the _Précieuses Ridicules_,
"I am sure _you_ have been well entertained, although you have
only been studying _la carte du tendre_." Lady Glenmore was too
much absorbed in her disappointment, to pay any attention to their
conversation; and when she roused herself from her reverie, she longed
to ask Lady Tenderden if she knew any thing of the House, and whether
it had broken up or not; but she feared to incur her ridicule. Other
men came into the box to pay their court to Lady Tenderden; and Mr.
Leslie Winyard contrived, in the general move that took place, to
secure the chair immediately behind Lady Glenmore's, and endeavoured to
regain her ear; but her mind was quite abstracted, and herself totally
uninterested in all that was passing; so he leant back in his chair,
and affected to be absent also, that he might appear to others to be
occupied sympathetically with herself.

At length Lady Glenmore could restrain her inquietude no longer; and
turning suddenly round, she said, "I wonder what can detain Lord
Glenmore! he promised to join me here." The different persons looked
at each other and smiled significantly; some in pity, some in derision,
all in contempt.

"Oh you know, my dear," replied Lady Tenderden, "dese conjugal
appointments are _sensé_ to be broken; dey are de pie-crusts of life."
Every body laughed, and poor Lady Glenmore coloured, as she felt a sort
of indignation rise in her heart against the whole scene and the actors
therein.

"But make yourself quite easy," Lady Tenderden added in a sort of
childish voice, "dere is no danger for Lord Glenmore; I will be
answerable for his safety."

Mr. Leslie Winyard affected to feel for Lady Glenmore, and to
disapprove of this joke; and turning to her, he said in his most
_doucereux_ tone, "You may depend upon it, a very long debate has taken
place, and engages Lord Glenmore's absence from hence _necessarily_. It
was always expected that the House would sit very late to-night: what
else could keep him away from _you_?" he whispered, with an expression
that was intended should soothe her; and it did soothe her, and she
felt grateful, and rewarded him by one of her sweetest smiles, saying,

"I conclude you are right." It was not long, however, before Lord
Boileau came into the box.

"Boileau, are you come from the House?" said Mr. Leslie Winyard.

"No," he replied; "the House was adjourned very early on account of the
ex-minister's illness, whose explanation was looked for."

Lady Glenmore heard this circumstance with a beating heart; and looking
reproachfully at Mr. Leslie Winyard, she said, "You see you were
mistaken; why did you deceive me?"

He affected, for a moment, to be overcome with disappointment and
chagrin, and then said in a low voice, "Oh, be not uneasy; there are so
many things may have detained a man in his station. Why do you suffer
yourself to be thus wretched? Would to Heaven he knew! If he did but
know, surely, surely he would be here. But how people mistake their own
happiness! Were I in his place--"

"You would be where he is," said Lady Glenmore with composure.

"Doubtless," rejoined Mr. Leslie Winyard with great presence of mind,
"for we cannot change natures with any one; nor indeed do we ever wish
it." And then he relapsed into silence.

Although Lady Glenmore felt piqued and mortified at her husband's
having broken his promise to her, she could not bear that any one else
should cast the least blame upon him; and she dismissed her chagrin,
and forced herself to talk gaily, as though her heart was light.

Mr. Leslie Winyard, apparently yielding to an irresistible impulse of
admiration, once, and once only, whispered to her, "Admirable creature!
it is only I that see through this disguise, and honour you for the
sacrifice you are making of your feelings, considering the motives by
which you are actuated."

She turned this speech off as a joke; but there was something in it
which, though it pained, yet pleased her. How difficult it is for the
purest natures not to lean to self-approbation when it comes in the
soft breath of praise! Nevertheless, the minutes seemed hours to her
till the curtain dropped, and she arose quickly to depart.

"Where are you going, _ma chère dame_?" said Lady Tenderden.
"Positively you must come with me. I have a _petit soupèr_ on purpose
for you; and as Lord Glenmore knows of old that it is my custom to have
this always after de play, having been prevented from joining us here,
he will not fail to come to my house, and we shall find him waiting for
us."

"Do you really think so?" asked Lady Glenmore hesitatingly.

"Yes, to be sure I do; at all events, you can but come and try; it
will be always time enough to go home afterwards." These persuasions,
adroitly pressed, won upon Lady Glenmore's easy credulity, and
she suffered herself to be handed down stairs, and got into Lady
Tenderden's carriage.

"You look quite divinely to-night," said Lady Tenderden to her as they
drove along--"positively _ravissante; vous ferez fureur, je l'avois
toujours prédit_. Even when you had dat horrible English _modiste_ to
dress you, you were always lovely; but now--now that you have de _vraie
tournure_, and dat _le coupe de vos cheveux_, and de plait of your
petticoat, is _d'après le dernier goût_, depend upon it, all de hearts
will fly to you."

Lady Glenmore laughed outright, it might be a little maliciously; for
she knew that no scissors, however classical in the estimation of her
companion, had touched the luxuriance of her beautiful hair, or any
body but her old English maid fashioned her petticoat; but she enjoyed
the mistake, and only thought, "This it is to be a minister's wife!"

When arrived at Lady Tenderden's house, every thing was prepared for
the reception of the _petit soupèr_, that is to say, about twenty
people of the _élite_; and the rooms were lit only to that precise
degree of brilliancy which is best expressed by a _jour tendre_; but
there was _no Lord Glenmore_.

Some of the gentlemen loitered round the instrument, touching the
notes, and humming some fashionable airs. "Apropos," said Lady
Tenderden, "nobody sings like Lady Glenmore, and Mr. Leslie Winyard
will accompany her in a duet."

"Pardon me," said the latter, "I sing so ill, I should only _put Lady
Glenmore out_," and he looked at her significantly; "besides, joking
apart, I have such a cold, it is impossible I could utter a sound. But
perhaps Lady Glenmore may be prevailed upon to favour us with an air,
which will come doubly recommended when not marred by such an ignoramus
as myself. Here are all sorts of beautiful things lying about;" and
he turned over the music. "Not only all the modern, but all the
half-antiquated compositions. Above all, here is my old admiration; and
it has this advantage over many of its cotemporaries, it has _echappé
belle_, and is not hackneyed, for this cogent reason, that hardly any
body _can_ sing it. I mean Haydn's _Ariana à Naxos_."

"Oh, charming!" echoed one or two _real_ amateurs; "do, Lady Glenmore,
do let us prevail with you to grant us the favour."

"Come," joined Lady Tenderden's voice with the rest, "I am sure you
will not have ended before _Teseo_ will have arrived." Lady Glenmore
_was_ prevailed on to comply; and though she began unwillingly, it
was a composition so much in unison with her actual feelings, that
unconsciously she became identified with its expression; and she
sang with such impassioned tenderness, and looked so much the Ariana
that she sang, that all the men were in unfeigned raptures, and Lady
Tenderden sat biting her lips in despite for having pressed her to
the trial of her skill. Once or twice Lady Glenmore paused when there
was a change in the movement, and half rose, saying, "This is too
long, you will be tired;"--but she permitted a _douce_ violence, and,
reseating herself, finished the whole _scena_. However delightful her
performance, and however delighted her audience might be, the odour of
the delicate viands that now awaited them made a powerful diversion
in favour of the latter; and with _empressement_, while murmurs of
applause were still on the lips of many of her auditors, they hastened
to arrange themselves at the table.

The Comtesse Leinsengen, who was of course of the party, observed to
Lord Baskerville, as he placed himself by her, "I am quite glad to put
de taste of dat horrid dull _Teseo_ out of my mouth. How people can
be so _baroque_ as to choose such long old-fashioned things, good for
nothing but your German professors!"

Lady Tenderden said, "_Avouez, moi milor, qu'une romance ou barcarolle
vaut bien mieux_."

"After all," said Lady Baskerville, "music is a good thing, but supper
is a better." And now came the general clatter of tongues and knives
and forks, sweeter than all the harmony of the spheres.

"I have made a vow," said Mr. Leslie Winyard to Lady Glenmore; "guess
what it is."

"No, tell me; for I never guessed any thing in my life."

"Why, never again to sing with you, even should you deign to ask me,
for I am quite convinced of the truth of your hint, that I only mar the
perfection of your song; and besides, the true way to feel _with you_,
is to see _you feel_, unoccupied by any thought of one's own." Then,
as if he avoided dwelling on the theme of his admiration, he talked
gaily, and glanced at various topics with that agreeable lightness
of manner which scarcely touches what it lights on, and alternately
made her laugh and nearly cry, till her spirits got into that state of
excitement which obscures reason, and leaves the mind in some degree
open to impressions that, at soberer and more reflective times, it
would cast off as not analogous to its healthful state.

It was at a very late hour that this party broke up. Day was breaking,
and with its clear pale light shaming their orgies, before Lady
Glenmore was actually on her way down stairs to depart; but suddenly
the morning was overcast with one of those thunder-storms not unusual
at the season, and torrents of rain burst from the clouds. A heavy
thunder-clap, that made the very houses rattle again, broke over the
spot where she stood: for an instant she paused, appalled, while the
company were rushing up and down past her, and snatching their various
coverings, to shield them as they flew to their carriages.

"You are not afraid?" said Mr. Leslie Winyard, gently pressing the arm
that rested upon his.

"No, not afraid," she answered; but her countenance was very serious,
and something seemed to reproach her for being in such a scene at such
an hour without any natural protector. She moved on, however, to her
carriage: it was the last at the door. "How do you go home?" she said
to Mr. Leslie Winyard.

"Oh! any how," he answered; and he looked around. "I see my people have
thought it wise to avoid the storm, and left me to take care of myself."

"Can I not set you down?" she asked, from an innocent impulse of
good-nature; and again a still louder clap of thunder rebounded over
their heads, and it was with difficulty the coachman held his horses,
as they reared and plunged violently.

"If you will be so very gracious," he answered, stepping in after her;
and at the same time the carriage door was shut, the footman leaped up
behind, and off the horses flew to ---- street.

"I am quite shocked," he said, "to take you out of your way; but really
I think it was not quite safe, with these young horses, to let you
go home alone, and unattended by any protector, in the midst of this
terrific storm."

"Oh! as to that, I am sure Lord Glenmore would never let me have horses
that were not to be depended upon."

"Will that tiresome name," thought Mr. Leslie Winyard, "never be out
of her mouth;" while he replied at the same time, "Doubtless he would
have _that_ care; for who would not be happy to have such a precious
charge as your safety delegated to him?"

"I am very tired," said Lady Glenmore, yawning; "I wonder what made me
stay so late; but I will never do so again."

"I fear, indeed," he answered, "that this, to me, most fortunate moment
will never return, and that I may never again be able to feel that
I am of the least use to you." At length they arrived at Mr. Leslie
Winyard's door. He reiterated his thanks, took his leave, waited at the
threshold till he saw her carriage depart, and Lady Glenmore proceeded
home.

No sooner was Lady Glenmore alone, than she began to reflect on the
unsatisfactory way in which she had passed the night. She felt sorry
that she had been prevailed upon to go to the supper, or, having gone,
that she had staid so long; and, last of all, she regretted having set
Mr. Leslie Winyard down in her carriage. With these excited feverish
feelings, she arrived at her own door.

As soon as she began to undress, she learnt from her maid that Lord
Glenmore had come home early, had waited till one o'clock for her
ladyship, and then gone to bed. "Dear, how provoking!" she said,
tearing off the ornaments she wore; "what could possess me to remain
out so late! How sorry I am!" and all the while she was demurring
in her own mind whether she should tell her husband that she had
set down Mr. Leslie Winyard, or pass the affair over in silence.
"He may be angry; and I meant no harm; and I cannot bear to see him
displeased. Why should I tell him? a thing, in fact, of such common
occurrence, and, in itself, so perfectly innocent." Thus, instead of
going to peaceful rest, did a feverish inquietude take possession of
her mind; for the first step of a married woman from the high road of
unquestioned purity is doing any thing, however trivial in itself,
of which, having done it, she feels she would _rather not_ tell her
husband.




CHAPTER IV.

CROSS PURPOSES.


As Lord Albert ascended to the drawing-room, followed by Mr. George
Foley, whom he had so inopportunely met at Lady Dunmelraise's door,
he felt his heart beat quick within his breast (notwithstanding the
chilling reserve with which a cold indignation steeled it), on the
sudden return of those jealous suspicions which blazed forth afresh
on finding the object of them on the very threshold of Lady Adeline's
presence at the same moment with himself.

Lord Albert was uncertain whether he should see Lady Adeline, or only
be admitted to Lady Dunmelraise. The former, however, had so far
regained an outward composure, that she had determined, should Lord
Albert call, to get over the pain of their first interview, and drink
the very dregs of her mortification at once. "I cannot suffer more,"
she said, "under any circumstances; and in the strength of this anguish
I may be better able to endure, and receive it with becoming dignity,
than at an after-time, when my treacherous heart may again yield to
delusive hopes."

Lady Adeline's mind, however, during the few hours which had elapsed
since Lady Dunmelraise had spoken to her, had profited by her mother's
kind and salutary counsel, and had, besides, found strength, in that
true spirit of resignation which bows to every event, with a perfect
conviction that every thing which concerns us is under the guidance of
a merciful Power who directs all things for our ultimate happiness; and
she acknowledged, with a feeling even of thankfulness, that, painful as
the trial was, it might have been far more painful, under circumstances
which must have rendered it of a deeper and more irremediable nature.
But after all that poor _human_ nature can do, the sense of sorrow for
a time overpowers all others; and when Lady Adeline heard Lord Albert's
well-known step, she would have fled his presence in despite of all her
previous resolves, had she not felt rooted to the spot.

It was a relief, therefore, to her, when he was announced, to see Mr.
Foley enter with him. Lady Dunmelraise was not in the room; and it was
perhaps as well that Adeline had no conscious witness of what was
passing in her breast at the moment, as it enabled her to bear herself
with more apparent ease of manner, than if any person acquainted with
her heart's secret had beheld the meeting. She received Lord Albert's
extended hand, but there was a mutual and chilling coldness in the
touch, too unlike the feeling which usually accompanied the action, for
them not both to be aware of the difference of this from any former
greetings; and each ascribed to the other the cause of this sad change.

Lord Albert was looking pale and harassed, but he was perfectly
calm, and inquired, with that steady voice which a sense of deep
injury conveys at the moment, after Lady Adeline's health, while he
expressed his concern at the indisposition under which she seemed to
have suffered so much the preceding evening. Her reply was short (for
she did not dare to trust herself with any allusion to the cause of
her illness), and she thanked him in as natural a manner as she could
assume; but her lip was blanched and quivered, and a tear was almost
glistening in her eye. To any one who knew what was really passing in
her heart, she would have appeared to have been saying to herself, "Is
it possible this is Albert? my Albert?" But turning the conversation
to some indifferent subject, she addressed herself with a semblance
of vivacity to Mr. Foley; that false vivacity to which the suffering
heart, when taking refuge from the moment's pressure, resorts, in order
to conceal its true feelings. Unfortunately Lord Albert was himself
too much blinded by his own at the time, to see through the specious
disguise she assumed; and with the perversity of jealous love, he put a
false construction on her every word and whole demeanour, and thought
he beheld in both the full confirmation of his suspicions.

Under this false view, Lord Albert turned with visible indignation
away, as if to avoid the pain which Lady Adeline's behaviour inspired;
and he seemed to be intently admiring the pictures which hung on the
walls, and which he knew by heart: but as his eye wandered over them,
in fact, unconsciously, it rested on a portrait of himself,--the same
which, when awaiting Lady Adeline's arrival in London with such lively
impatience, he had then missed from its usual station. How a trifling
circumstance has power to double pain or pleasure, when it comes thus
laden with past and present allusion to the interests of the heart! The
idea at that time of its being her companion was joy to his spirit.
With what very different feelings did he regard it _now_! The whole of
his late hopes seemed to him a mockery, and his heart sickened at the
thought as he again turned from the contemplation and threw himself
into a chair.

There was a soul-searching glance of tender reproach in the look which
he cast upon Lady Adeline. She coloured deeply, and was so intensely
affected, that it was with difficulty she could support herself. Had
there been no witness of their emotion, that moment would have brought
them to a mutual conviction of their true sentiments for each other;
but as it was, Lady Adeline strove to hide her feelings by turning
her countenance away from him, and talking with more earnestness in
a low, quick voice to Mr. Foley. Lord Albert rose, paced the room
hurriedly, and was on the point of rushing away, when at that moment
Lady Dunmelraise entered the apartment. At sight of her Lord Albert
recovered his self-possession. He approached Lady Dunmelraise with
composure, though with rather more of formal dignity in his manner
than he was accustomed to show towards one whom he knew so well, and
whom he had so long considered almost as a mother. There was a similar
restraint on her part; and to his measured expressions of regret on
the subject of Lady Adeline's sudden illness the preceding evening, she
replied coldly and briefly, and then passed on to indifferent subjects,
in which all present took their share. Lord Albert, however, rarely
addressed himself to Lady Adeline or Mr. Foley, but seemed pointedly to
confine his conversation to Lady Dunmelraise; while Lady Adeline, on
her part, fearing to lift her eyes to him, or trust her voice with the
most trivial expression immediately directed to him, continued to talk
to Mr. Foley, though in so unconnected and absent a manner, that could
he have overheard what she said, something like the truth must have
been forced upon his mind.

After remaining a short half hour, which appeared to the parties most
interested like half a century, Lady Dunmelraise, wishing to act on
the principle she had explained to her daughter, of showing no very
marked difference towards Lord Albert, said, "Adeline will not venture
out this evening for fear of a return of her headache. Perhaps, Lord
Albert, if you are not engaged, you will dine and pass a quiet evening
with us?" It is difficult to say how far Lord Albert, whose heart was
ever alive to the slightest kindness, would have rejoiced to accept
this offer, and grasp at the cherished idea that his society was still
wished for, had not Lady Dunmelraise, in the same breath, turned to Mr.
Foley, saying;

"George, will you not be of the party, and dine here too?" There was
a momentary cloud passed over Lord Albert's brow, and Mr. Foley had
accepted the invitation before he could reply. At length, after a
painful pause, Lord Albert said;

"I should be happy, Lady Dunmelraise," and he spoke rather pointedly,
"to avail myself of the wish you have expressed to see me, but your
invitation reminds me that I have neglected to announce an event with
which, perhaps, you are already acquainted, but which I conceive our
intimacy demanded that I should make known to you myself, and which
I came here this day for the express purpose of doing, or I should
not have obtruded myself while I thought Lady Adeline's indisposition
would probably have prevented you from receiving _any one_;" and he
looked reproachfully at her as he said this. Lady Dunmelraise could not
suppress a movement of astonishment. Adeline stopped for want of breath
in her conversation with Mr. Foley, not knowing to what announcement
Lord Albert alluded; and there was but one thought present to her
fancy, one subject superseding all others in her mind; but she
endeavoured to still her extreme agitation by saying to herself, "He
never could have the refinement of cruelty to break off our engagement
so publicly in the presence of an indifferent person." She awaited,
nevertheless, in a state of terror that almost deprived her of a sense
of hearing, what he would next say.

After a considerable pause, or one which seemed such to her, Lord
Albert spoke.

"I do not know whether you care about politics, Lady Dunmelraise?" At
this word, politics, Adeline took courage.

"No," said Lady Dunmelraise, at once relieved and recovered from her
surprise, for she also had thought his preface strangely portentous;
"no, I do not," she said: "they are not a woman's province, except in
as far as regards the interests of those dear to her. But what of them?"

"Why only that changes have taken place, and----."

"Oh yes," interrupted Lady Dunmelraise, as an increasing expression
of sunshine broke over her countenance, "I have heard that various
changes in the cabinet were intended, and that some of my friends were
to be advantaged by the move."

"It is in confirmation of these reports that I came to inform you.
I now myself fill a place in the administration: not that it can be
of any consequence," he added, with some pique, and his lip trembled
as he spoke; "but as you used kindly to express an interest in me in
former times, I have thought it my duty that you should not learn this
circumstance from any other than myself."

"Oh, my dear Lord Albert!" replied Lady Dunmelraise, "I am always happy
to hear of any event which you deem conducive to your happiness: I
hope that this, together with every future step in your life, will be
so likewise; and I very sincerely give you joy of having obtained this
object of your wishes. Adeline," turning to her daughter, "you too must
express your congratulations to Lord Albert." This was almost too much
for Lady Adeline's full heart, but without venturing to look directly
at him, she said;

"Oh, I always do, mamma, wish him happy in every way." Lady Dunmelraise
was aware of her daughter's emotion, and endeavoured to relieve her by
addressing Lord Albert herself.

"These arrangements will not, however, I hope, prevent our seeing you
at dinner to-day: you are not already so involved in the affairs of the
nation as not to be able to spend a few hours with your friends?" Lady
Adeline listened with the impatience of sickening hope for his reply;
in vain trying to soothe herself with the idea, that were he once more
as much in their society as he used to be, he would love them as dearly
as ever.

"I am grieved," he said, in answer to Lady Dunmelraise, "that it is
quite out of my power, for I must be at the House almost immediately: a
lengthened debate is expected on the subject of the late changes, and
it is necessary I should be in my place."

"We are equally sorry with yourself, dear Lord Albert! but we hope
another time to be more fortunate." Another pause ensued. Lady
Adeline's spirits again sank, but she continued her painful effort
to rally, by talking more than ever to Mr. Foley; and Lord Albert,
fancying that his presence was as irksome to her, as remaining longer
was painful to himself, immediately took his leave, and left the house
mortified, miserable, and out of humour with himself and the whole
world. He had really stated the fact, in pleading public business as
the cause of his declining Lady Dunmelraise's invitation; and he
had hardly time to reach the House before the commencement of the
debate. On arriving there, and soon after he had taken his seat, it
was announced that the member was seriously indisposed who had been
expected to give one of those explanations which (such is the low ebb
of character among British statesmen of the present day) every one who
has held part in the government of the country has latterly thought it
necessary to make in vindication of his public conduct. The question
was consequently put off; and the House, after some business of little
importance, and moving for new writs for those members who had accepted
situations under government, adjourned at an early hour.

Lord Albert found himself thus relieved from the tie which had
prevented his accepting Lady Dunmelraise's invitation; but it was
no longer a question with him, as it would have been under other
circumstances, of returning to South Audley-street, and stating what
had occurred to set him at liberty, and requesting to avail himself of
the opportunity to receive the pleasure of dining there. This would
have been the act of a healthful mind, but under the mental disease
which now tormented him, he turned with scorn from the idea; for he
saw every thing in a distorted point of view, and ascribed to Lady
Dunmelraise and her daughter the unworthy design of intending to
provoke him to a relinquishment of his engagement with the latter,
either because they did not choose to break with him themselves, or
because they were not, perhaps, yet sure of Mr. Foley's intentions.
Nothing but jealousy could have raised such a suspicion, so unworthy
of them and of himself, respecting persons so long known, so much and
justly esteemed, so clearly loved: but what chimera is too monstrous
not to be born of that fiend which had taken possession of him? Under
this species of aberration, for it can be called by no milder name, he
threw himself on his horse, rode off, careless whither he went, and
found himself in the park.

All the _élite_ of _ton_ were congregated around Kensington Gardens,
and amongst the carriages waiting, he observed Lady Hamlet Vernon's.
In the turbulence of his emotions, and in the press of business during
the morning, he now recollected that he had forgotten to tell her of
his official situation, although he felt that from her at least he
would meet with a sincere and lively participation in the satisfaction
he experienced at the success of his opening career in the political
world. But his heart was not satisfied; and, suffering under his fatal
delusion, he needed the balm of kindness, and turned to her for its
bestowal. Giving his horse, therefore, to his servant, he went into the
Gardens with the intention of finding her. They met as she was on the
point of leaving the party she was walking with, and returning to her
carriage. He accosted her with a sort of interest in his manner which
could not fail of being agreeable to her, and they continued walking
and conversing earnestly on the subject which he briefly communicated
to her.

So earnestly, indeed, did they discuss the matter, that they found
themselves at length almost the only persons in the Gardens, and were
reminded only, by this circumstance, of the lateness of the hour. Lady
Hamlet Vernon, astonished, looked at her watch, and finding it past
seven o'clock, said she must hasten home, as she had invited persons
to dine with her, and pressed Lord Albert to join the party. This he
promised to do; and he felt a kind of false pleasure in thinking he
should, at least, be in the society of those who really valued him; for
there was a sting of pique and mortification at his heart, which Lady
Hamlet Vernon's conversation had not diminished, and which made him
gladly seek refuge out of himself for consolation. After the dinner,
the party broke up to go to Almack's, and Lord Albert D'Esterre,
_desœuvré_ and dissatisfied, was easily persuaded to accompany
Lady Hamlet Vernon. On entering the room, the first person whom he
recognised was Lady Delamere and her daughters. He bowed to them, and
he thought they returned his bow coldly. This circumstance did not
escape the observation of Lady Hamlet Vernon, and she talked of the
Delameres in a way which, though quite untrue, Lord Albert was at the
moment too much in a temper to listen to.

"I often wonder," she said, "if all the uninteresting persons were
ejected from society, how few would be left. But I believe, if this
were the case, the evil would only assume another shape; for an
assembly like this, if all were perfect, would be the dullest thing in
the world: it is the mixture which affords us amusement."

"Besides," rejoined Lord Albert, "_le monde est plein de fous, et qui
n'en veut pas voir doit demeurer tout seul, et cassèr son miroir_."

Lady Hamlet Vernon did not quite like the possible application of the
adage; but she endeavoured to turn the spleen which she saw was the
feeling of the moment with him into the channel best adapted to her
views. "It is not fools," she continued, "that I find so much fault
with, as dull and insipid people. There is Lady Delamere, again,
for instance, who is one of your good mammas walking about with her
chickens, all so measured and so _mime_, that one is sure a happy
erratum could never occur in their life or conversation. There is no
hope that they will ever change, for they are 'content to dwell in
decencies for ever.' Their very loves and hatreds are measured out by
the square rule of fit and proper; and if the friend they liked best
made any deviation from what they deemed the proper course, they would
discard such an one from their favour. This I hold to be cold-hearted
and selfish policy, sheltering itself under the mask of virtue; for
the fact is, that half that class of people build their power upon a
pretence to superiority in moral excellence, not for its own sake, I am
certain, but for the sake of obtaining the favour of general opinion,
which their slender means of _agréments_ (they have sense enough to
know) would never give them."

"Do you mean, then, to say, that all superiority of purity in conduct
or character springs from such false and ignoble sources? That, dear
Lady Hamlet, you know is impossible; for the same fountain cannot
send forth sweet waters and bitter." Lady Hamlet Vernon felt that Lord
Albert was not in a mood to pass lightly over any thing that was said
on serious subjects, and quickly corrected herself, adding;

"Far be it from me to think that there are not _some_ natures genuinely
pure and noble. _Mais ne vous en déplaise._ I cannot endow that _bonne
pâte de femme_ with such brilliant investment. Lady Delamere, my dear
Lord D'Esterre, is, as you must know, the dullest, heaviest person I
ever conversed with; and allow me to tell you she can give herself
sufficient airs of consequence. Nevertheless, I have known several
instances in which she scrupled not to sacrifice persons that it suited
her to put down. _Au reste_, I make no doubt she has all those good
qualities which quizzes always teem with."

"Really," said Lord D'Esterre, "you astonish me! I thought at least she
had been good-natured."

"Your own good-nature does not allow you to see these things; you have
been used, you know, to consider all that party perfect; but"--Lord
Albert sighed deeply--"but you will find," continued Lady Hamlet
Vernon, fully aware of the meaning of that emotion which had escaped
him, and wishing to abstract his mind from the cause, by adverting
to mere general topics, "you will find that the world is made up of
classes. There are the Duchess D'Hermanton, Lady Borrowdaile, Lady
Aveling, form one class; Lady Melcombe and her people form another;
your friends the Misses D. another; and we, you know, form a class
totally apart." Lord Albert listened to this kind of conversation
sometimes with attention, sometimes abstractedly. His mind frequently
adverted to totally different subjects; but still he sat by Lady Hamlet
Vernon's side the whole evening, or walked with her about the rooms.

In doing this, he was not aware of the occasion he gave for remark;
still less did he know that Lady Delamere had observed him in Lady
Hamlet Vernon's box the preceding evening, and that that very
circumstance had caused Lady Adeline's illness; for if he had guessed
this truth, different indeed would have been the result of his
morning's interview with her. His appearance again, on the present
evening, with Lady Hamlet Vernon, very naturally occasioned Lady
Delamere's altered manner; but he saw in her behaviour only the
confirmation of an intention, on the part of Lady Dunmelraise and
her daughter, and of the whole family, to break with him altogether.
Neither did it occur to him, so prepossessed was he with the idea
that Adeline was happier in Mr. Foley's society than in his own, that
his excuse for not dining with Lady Dunmelraise must now appear to
have been false, and framed expressly for the purpose of fulfilling
another engagement. How very different would have been his feelings,
could he have known the anguish he inflicted on her who still loved
him so truly; and the additional wounds she would receive, when the
circumstance of his seeming devotion to Lady Hamlet Vernon, during
the whole of that evening, with the aggravation attending it of his
supposed duplicity, should become known to her!

The fact was, although he was perfectly unconscious of it, that Lord
Albert's attentions to Lady Hamlet Vernon began to be considered in the
light of a _liaison_ by the world; yet notwithstanding he was deemed
too wise to risk matrimony, yet that was the last thing cared for. In
society, arrangements which included _one_ now generally included the
other. The young men rejoiced in Lord Albert's being brought to their
own level, as they thought; and all who had any thing to hide in their
own conduct felt less afraid of his superiority, when they saw him on
the verge of an intrigue of the same nature as many of their own.

When, at length, Lord Albert D'Esterre returned home, the hum of
voices, and the unmeaning admixture of dancing tunes, mingled together
in utter discordance, still sounded in his ears, and he felt provoked
at himself for having wasted many hours so unsatisfactorily. The
tension of the mind, under the action of such feelings as those which
agitated his breast, is never really relieved in similar scenes or by
similar means; and the false, feverish excitement produced by them,
when it passes off, leaves the sufferer a thousand times more low and
debilitated than before he had recourse to them. Lord Albert turned
every way but the right way to find peace; and when sleep did visit
him, it was not the balmy friend which comes to the pillow of an
approving conscience.




CHAPTER V.

THE PRESENTATION AT COURT.


The day at length arrived, to which so many had looked forward with
lingering expectation, and which, to the young in general, was one
of delightful anticipation. Among these, however, there was one who,
though both young and beauteous, and likely, under other circumstances,
to have enjoyed the idea of coming out into the dazzling scene of the
world, remained unmoved by the general festivity, from a dread of the
trial which the scene would probably bring to her feelings.

Lady Delamere had communicated to Lady Dunmelraise the circumstance
of her having seen Lord Albert D'Esterre the preceding evening at
Almack's, and of his being engrossed the whole time with Lady Hamlet
Vernon;--intelligence naturally productive of the most painful
conclusions, and which, of course, received considerable aggravation
in Lady Dunmelraise's mind from the excuses made by Lord Albert for
not dining in South Audley-street on that day. She however felt
that, although most painful, it was right to inform Adeline of this
fresh instance of Lord Albert's unfeeling conduct, in order that she
might, by so doing, lead her more and more to wean her affections from
a person so unworthy as he now appeared to be, and help to destroy
the remaining hopes which her daughter might otherwise retain of his
returning affection.

Lady Adeline might well have thought that she had been prepared for the
worst, and imagined that her cup of sorrow was filled to the brim; but
at this additional circumstance she felt, that the human heart is never
so full of bitterness, but that there may be added some drops of gall.
Her usual serenity, however, did not wholly forsake her; but her first
impulse was to entreat her mother to spare her the trial of attending
the drawing-room.

"I wish," she said, "to be suffered to gain strength in retirement,
and to seek for resignation, where you, my dearest mamma, have ever
taught me it can alone be found. Some day or other," though she did not
believe what she was saying, "some day or other, I dare say, I shall be
quite happy again; only _now_"----But at that moment the _quite happy_
were words too much in contrast to the _quite wretched_ at her heart,
for her lips to be able to pronounce, and in a passion of tears her
feelings found relief.

Lady Dunmelraise suffered them to flow unimpeded, and when she regained
composure, said, "My dearest child, I insist on nothing to which you
think yourself unable; but if you _can_ make the exertion, do so, for
my sake and your own. Reflect on the humbled feelings of your mother
and of yourself, if Lord Albert should ever know into what a depth of
sorrow and humiliation he has plunged us both."

"Mamma, mamma, he must know that; for does he not know, has he not
seen, have I not shown him a thousand times how very dear he is to
me? and, after all, what should I be, if I were not humiliated by his
desertion?"

"Most true, dearest, in heart; but there is a prudence and decorum to
be preserved in outward seeming; a respect due to ourselves, in not
displaying our feelings to the unfeeling world, who only trample upon
them with unheeding carelessness, and can never appreciate their depth
or value. I can well understand, my dear child, that you will be making
an heroic effort, by going into public under the present suffering
state of your heart; but I do ask of you to make that effort; for
I know, by experience, that there is much _real_ power gained over
ourselves by assuming its _appearance_."

This conversation ended by Lady Adeline's promising to do every thing
her mother wished for her dear sake, whom she loved with more than
filial affection; and, having once given this promise, she determined
to fulfil it nobly. The satisfaction which follows any sacrifice of
selfish feelings to the wishes of those whom it is our duty to please
is never-failing, and, under every circumstance, affords a peace
which can never be obtained by their indulgence to the dereliction of
principle.

But, notwithstanding all Lady Adeline's amiable qualities, and all the
estimable motives of her conduct, she could not avoid the natural pangs
of sorrow and anxiety, which she, in common with every human being, is
doomed to experience. Come they must in some shape or other to all;
happiest are those who entertain them wisely. The whole of that day, an
ebb and flow of dread and doubt passed over her in alternate tides of
hope or despondence;--of doubt, if Lord Albert would again call,--of
dread, lest, if he did call, she should betray herself to him; yet of
hope, that he might put this trial to the test,--and of despondence,
as the hours passed away and no Lord Albert appeared.

Fortunately, before we are tired of sorrow, sorrow tires us, so that
wearied nature finds refuge in sleep despite of itself; and this was
the case of Lady Adeline, whose eyes, while yet full of tears, were
closed in slumber: but it is the wakening again which is the trial;
then we seem to have derived fresh power to suffer, and the sad vision
of grief is presented to us with renewed vitality. Such were Lady
Adeline's feelings when her maid brought to her bedside the attire and
the ornaments with which she was that day to be adorned, in order to
enter upon a scene of pleasure which to most young hearts is attended
with so many fascinations.

"Take them all away, Mourtray," she said, "take them all away; it is
not time to dress yet." And when the time did come, how many painful
recollections marred every thought of pleasure! Should she see Lord
Albert in the crowd? was the first question she asked herself; and if
she did see him, how would he behave to her? how should she behave to
him? If he were unoccupied by any one at the moment, and apparently
disengaged from any interesting conversation, she thought she could
go through the scene; but if he were talking to one whose name was
now too well known to her, and too closely allied with the cause of
her misery, she feared that neither the time nor the place would be
sufficient restraints to sustain her under the trial.

"Every body," she said, looking at herself in the glass, "every body
must read my story in my face. These red, red eyes, these swollen
lips!"--And then she started up from her seat and cried, "No, no, it
must not be thus! it is for my dearest mamma's sake I am going, and
for her sake I will master my emotion, I will endeavour to assume
the tranquillity which she recommends." Repeated immersion of her
face in cold water, and the being told that a short half hour only
remained to the time appointed by Lady Delamere for her to be at her
house, restored, in some degree, the beauty of her complexion and the
animation of her eyes; while the bustle of necessary haste imparted
that glow to her cheeks, which, though called forth by feverish and
fervid feelings, could still boast of being the delicate dye of the
rose. Her dress was in itself of the simplest and most unadorned
fashion; and when her jewels were presented to her by her attendant,
most of which had been gifts from Lord Albert, she laid them all aside,
and positively declined wearing any. The extreme luxuriance of her
light, crisped hair, braided and curled in many a graceful fold, was
her only decoration; except that, as she passed a myrtle (the gift of
Lord Albert also), she hastily plucked a branch of it, and placed it
with some care in her bosom. How deceitful is the human heart! and,
above all, how deceitful is the passion of love, which conceals itself
under a thousand disguises! The jewels were discarded, but the flower
was chosen; that flower, which, for its emblematic associations, was
ten times dearer to her, and spoke a softer language than the diamonds'
blaze or the rubies' dye. Thus while denying, she cherished, love! Oh,
woman, woman! you alone know the meaning of the word, its thousand
concealed tendernesses, its purity of essence, its endless springs of
increase!

Lady Dunmelraise, when she took leave of her daughter, pressed her to
her heart, and as she blessed her with an honest pride, thought there
could not be a fairer, purer being, among the glittering throng. "Be of
good cheer," she said, "love, and sustain your own dignity."

When Lady Adeline arrived at her aunt's house, she had to undergo the
gaze of the persons assembled to look at the dresses of those who were
going to court, whose remarks, as she passed, kept alive that flutter
of spirits which prevented her from indulging in softer feelings, and
on the present occasion was of infinite use to her. On beholding her
dress, her cousins exclaimed against the total absence of ornament or
jewels; but she said, it was of no consequence, nobody would look at
her; and when they all offered her various _aigrettes_ and necklaces,
she besought them not to insist on her wearing them.

"I have plenty at home," she said; but added, with a melancholy smile,
"I have made a vow to wear none." Lady Delamere understood her, and
thought her own loveliness stood her in good stead of any extraneous
aid. At all events, she conceived it was cruel to press her further;
and as time admitted of no delay, they went to their carriage through
a line of persons drawn up on each side, all of whom bore testimony to
Lady Adeline's beauty. They went slowly along in the splendid equipage,
which, in the magnificence of old family state, attracted unusual
attention; till, coming to St. James's-street, they were obliged,
by the string of carriages, to continue moving on at a foot's pace.
And here again the gaping crowd made no inapt observations as the
glittering throng passed in array before them.

One singular-looking, fat man actually followed the carriage a
considerable way, evidently in admiration of Lady Adeline; and observed
to the person near him, loudly enough for her to hear what he said,
"As for _she_, so plain-dressed like, she's the biggest beauty of 'em
all," pointing at her; "but she wears all her diamonds and pearls in
her eyes and mouth." The people around roared and laughed, apparently
in approbation, and even Adeline smiled and blushed. By the time they
arrived at the entry of Buckingham House, her cheeks were glowing, and
her eyes sparkling, with an excitement which was, she acknowledged to
herself, salutary at the time, though factitious and evanescent. The
brilliancy of the scene too, so new to her, was not without its effect.
The rich liveries of the attendants, the military, the truly British
grandeur of the yeomen of the guard, the blaze of beauty, of dress, and
of smiles, struck Adeline with admiration and momentary pleasure; and
in her own natural way, she said to one of her cousins,

"This is a noble sight. I am glad I came. Mamma is always in the
right." But then in another moment she sighed; and remembering all
the circumstances that had so recently passed, the whole moving mass
of feathers, flowers, and jewels, became one undistinguishable
confusion, without power to charm or awaken her interest. But all
this while, she was borne along on the stream of the crowd; and she
heard, amid the buzz of voices, her own name, and then the observation
which followed it. Women always talk of the dress of those they wish
to _denigré_, and of course Adeline's was commented upon, and found
great fault with. "Quite improper, I declare!" said old Lady Honeyman
to her distorted daughters, whose features, under the influence of the
dancing St. Vitus, seemed to redouble their activity in honour of the
shaking brilliants with which they were covered; "I declare it is quite
improper to come to court as if one was in one's chemise! perfectly
shocking! quite indecent! Poor thing! had she nobody belonging to her
who could lend her a pair of earrings, at least?"--"What a beautiful
creature!" cried another voice; (a man's, of course) "did you ever see
any thing like the harmony of her features and the shape of her ear? it
is quite classical; and she has none of those horrid girandoles pendent
to it to spoil its form."

"Who is she?" "who is she?" went round and round in audible whispers;
and the last speaker pressed onwards, somewhat careless of the
convenience of his neighbours, on purpose to get another view of her.

"How people do squeeze!" said the enraged Lady Honeyman; "it is like
a bear-garden. Elfrida, my love, take care of your diamond cestus:
Lauretta, do not lose your ruby _aigrette_.--There, sir, there!--you
have torn my Brussels lace lappet all to pieces with the hilt of your
sword!"--And at this appeal the gentleman looked down on the little
yellow dwarf with infinite dismay and many apologies; and stopping to
disengage his sword from the ill-fated lappet, cast an evil eye upon
the black Lauretta, who assisted to disengage the lappet, wishing her
in the shrine of her namesake, where all her diamonds might receive
that homage which he was only endeavouring to pay to the unadorned
Adeline's genuine beauty.

At length Lady Adeline and her party reached the room in which the
sovereign stood; and Lady Adeline found herself suddenly in an open
space, from whence the monarch, and those persons attached to his
household, could distinctly see every person separately who entered.
Lady Adeline felt awed, for she had imbibed a respectful attachment
to the person of her sovereign, and her young feelings were those of
enthusiastic loyalty.

Lord Albert, who in his official situation had the private _entré_,
had not yet seen Lady Adeline, and at the moment she appeared in the
door-way, was talking to Prince Luttermanne; when the latter, with his
habitual admiration for every thing young and new, was so struck with
her appearance, that he broke off his conversation, saying, "Who is
that very extraordinarily beautiful girl now entering?" Lord Albert,
whose back was towards her, turned suddenly round, and, on beholding
her, was so overcome by a sudden revulsion of feeling, that he could
not directly reply. He hesitated, his countenance changed, his lip
quivered; and, after a considerable pause, he abruptly said, "Oh!
that is Adeline." Prince Luttermanne looked astonished, saying at the
same time, "Who the deuce is Adeline?" but Lord Albert had not waited
to answer any further inquiries. He moved away round the back of the
circle, to get a more distinct view of the object so unexpectedly
presented to him;--an object still dearer to his heart than any other
upon earth, and one whose presence, when, as thus, suddenly brought
before him, was never-failing in overturning all the sophistry of art,
and all the juggles and distortion of jealous passion. In the present
instance she stood before him as the personification of innocence and
truth.

In the midst of splendour and of beauty, _her_ beauty shone forth
in its unadorned power, and in the freshness of its morning purity,
pre-eminently bright in perfect simplicity. She was not unconscious of
the admiration she excited; but that very consciousness added to her
charms: it deepened the roseate colour of her cheek, gave additional
lustre to the tremulous sparkle of her eye, and threw over her whole
air and person that veil of diffidence which imparts grace to every
movement and interest to every glance. Lord Albert gazed on her with
intense admiration. He thought of the time when he had looked forward
to the present epoch in Lady Adeline's existence, as to one in which he
should be a partaker in her triumph, and gather up the suffrages paid
to her beauty as though they were so many offerings bestowed to gratify
his own feelings and confirm the superiority of his own choice;--but,
as it was, how differently did he feel!

She was now nothing to him, he was nothing to her; she cared not for
his approbation or his censure; she knew not whether he was to be
present at this her first _debut_ in the world, or not: and then,
again, a change came over his fluctuating feelings, and recalling to
mind the thousand instances in which she had proved her attachment to
him, the truth for a moment flashed before his fancy, and in despite
of all that had lately occurred, he believed himself dear to her. How
an enamoured imagination catches at trifles, and is the sport of hope
or fear! Lord Albert for a moment felt the full glow of tenderness and
trust float over his whole being, like a refreshing dew over a thirsty
land; and as he moved along, unheeding the gay crowd that flitted past
him, he sought only for the one object whom he desired to behold. He
now caught a glimpse of her, and then lost it again, obscured by some
feathered headdress, or some uninteresting intervening object; but, at
length, he reached a spot from whence he had a full view of her, as she
half knelt to kiss the sovereign's hand, and was raised again by the
most graceful action; and Lord Albert had the gratification of thinking
he saw an expression of gracious admiration in the sovereign, as he
turned to one of the lords in waiting, evidently making some remark on
Lady Adeline.

But all this while Lord Albert failed in catching her eye; and he now
retraced his steps as hastily as the crowd would allow, in order to
reach the door by which Lady Adeline must necessarily go out. In this
attempt, however, he was disappointed, for such was the pressure and
hurry of the officers to prevent a crowd in the presence-chamber,
and Lady Adeline was so rapidly hurried on, that she was quickly lost
to Lord Albert's view by the intervening multitude. He had not even
the gratification of once catching her eye as she passed; for, added
to the celerity with which she was compelled to move on after her
presentation, she felt, as was natural to one so young, a degree of
mingled flurry and awe, which kept her eyes fixed on the ground.

This, however, did not suggest itself to Lord Albert, and he questioned
himself to ascertain whether her apparent unconsciousness of his
presence was real or feigned. Notwithstanding this doubt, Lord Albert
continued his pursuit of her, and was so long unsuccessful, that he
began to think she must have left the Court. As he made his way with
difficulty through the crowd, he heard her name frequently mentioned,
and always accompanied with praises of her beauty. As expressions of
this kind fell on his ear, he could not forbear feeling that it was
profanation for any one to dare to speak of Lady Adeline but himself:
so unjust and so monopolizing is the spirit of jealous love.

At length, Lord Albert, almost despairing of meeting with Lady Adeline
by moving about, determined to fix himself at the outward door of
the saloon, where he knew that she must pass in going away. Here he
resolved to await the departure of the whole crowd, and, at least,
ascertain the fact; but he had only taken this position a very short
time, when Lady Hamlet Vernon appeared on the stairs, and nodding to
Lord Albert as she descended into the great hall, approached, and
took the seat which of course he relinquished to her. However much
he had, of late, sought her society, and felt entangled by the spell
which she knew so well to cast over him, there existed, at the present
moment, a disposition to emancipate himself from the thraldom, and he
felt her presence to be an intrusion. In proportion as these feelings
increased, so did the restraint in his manner and conversation become
more evident; and Lady Hamlet Vernon was much too penetrating, not to
be aware that some strong interest directed his attention from her.

He had remained some time in this embarrassed situation, which a
mutual consciousness rendered every moment more painful. Answering
Lady Hamlet Vernon's questions mechanically with his lips, while his
thoughts and eyes were wandering in quest of the only object he wished
to see, he suddenly beheld Lady Adeline, with Lady Delamere and her
cousins, at the bottom of the staircase, and was on the point of
abruptly leaving Lady Hamlet Vernon's side, and darting towards her,
when Lady Adeline's eyes were for a moment directed to him. A mutual
glance was interchanged, as brief as it was powerful, and he felt that
at least she had seen, had recognized him, and in that single glance
their souls had met and felt together; but her eyes quickly dropped,
she spoke hastily to Lady Delamere, and they mutually turned, as if to
re-ascend the staircase. This movement, however, although its intention
was evident, was so in contradiction with Lady Adeline's glance of
recognition, that it did not deter Lord Albert from ardently wishing to
speak to Lady Adeline; and he was hastening away, in despite of Lady
Hamlet Vernon's endeavours to arrest his attention, to join the former,
when a cry of "Throw open the window! water! she faints!" struck his
ear. The sound came from the opposite quarter in which he was going;
but when he perceived the bustle, and the crowd endeavouring to make
way for some person who was ill, and whom they were trying to bring
into a freer current of air, his first impulse was to stand aside
also, and lend his assistance for that purpose. In doing this, he soon
recognised the lady who had fainted to be Lady Glenmore, borne in the
arms of Mr. Leslie Winyard; and then, with renewed interest, as the
wife of his friend Lord Glenmore, he pressed forward, and succeeded
in making a passage to the window, the sash of which he threw up, and
partly aided in placing Lady Glenmore on a seat: he then hastened away
for water and restoratives.

Every one was forward in tendering assistance to the minister's wife;
and whilst many officiously stood around her, others, of better
judgment and kinder intentions, went in search of Lord Glenmore.

"What a lucky fellow!" cried Lord Boileau, one of the idlers who was
standing near; "what a lucky fellow that Leslie Winyard is, to have the
carrying of that beautiful creature in his arms!"

"Oh! you know _c'est une affaire arrangé_," said Lord Gascoigne. "She
never speaks to any one else now."

Lord Albert heard these remarks with indignation as he returned with
water, and could not help casting a look at the speakers, that they
well understood.

"Upon my word," observed Lord Boileau, "that man is quite insufferable.
I thought he was improved since he lived amongst us; but I suppose he
looks forward to rival Leslie Winyard, and will not hear the lady's
fame called in question on account of any one but himself."

"Bah!" replied Lord Gascoigne; "Lady Hamlet Vernon will never suffer
that."

"Is that really as people say?" asked Lord Boileau.

"Oh! quite settled long ago," answered Lord Gascoigne; "and as she is a
_maitresse femme_, she will not allow him to forsake her quietly."

"How very beautiful, how very lovely she is, Boileau!" said Lord
Baskerville, approaching at that moment; "now that she can neither talk
nor laugh, she is quite charming--hem! I never knew before that she was
handsome--hem! She ought to do nothing but faint--hem!"

"Yes," they both replied, "she is very lovely indeed." "I rather envy
Leslie Winyard," cried Lord Boileau: "that fellow has always been
lucky. But have you seen Lady Adeline Seymour, _la nouveauté du jour_?
Rather raw and unfledged yet, but she will be a very fine creature a
year or two hence."

"Don't you know her story?" whispered Lord Baskerville, approaching his
mouth to the ear of Lord Boileau.

"No--yes--I did hear something of it. She is going to be married, isn't
she?"

"She _was_," rejoined Lord Baskerville, looking very wise; "but, a-hem!
that's all off now. I know all about it--hem! for _he_ is so involved,
hem! that marriage is impossible--hem! And really the poor girl has
_echappé belle_; for I never knew such a puritanical affected--hem!
I cannot conceive what the women see about him to endure him for a
moment--hem!"

By this time the report of Lady Glenmore's having fainted spread
through the rooms, and there were assembled around her Lady Tilney,
Lady Ellersby, and the Comtesse Leinsengen.

"I do not wonder you were overcome, my dear Lady Glenmore; it was
terribly hot," said Lady Tilney in her most coaxing manner. "These
vile drawing-rooms are quite enough to kill one. Such a heat, and such
a crowd of Heaven knows whom! And then to see whom, or what? for one
never sees the ostensible object for whom one comes here. If it were
not to oblige Lord Tilney, and because one must, I would never come to
such a horrid place again. My dear Lady Glenmore, you who have suffered
so much are, I am sure, out of all patience with the whole thing."

Lady Glenmore, who had by this time quite recovered, and who was placed
very comfortably enjoying the fresh breeze that came to her unpolluted
by the heat and breath of the crowd, as she sat close by the window,
now resumed her accustomed smiling cheerfulness, and replied,

"Not at all, Lady Tilney; I assure you I have been much amused,
and think it is a very splendid scene;--so much beauty, so much
magnificence, that I was quite provoked at myself for being overcome,
and unable to enjoy it; but I am perfectly well again _now_, and I hope
another time to be more used to it."

"_Quelle niaiserie!_" whispered the Comtesse Leinsengen to Lord
Baskerville. "She ought to go back to her nursery."

"Nothing is so tiresome," replied Lord Baskerville, "as low people who
are always diverted. They must be false or fools, a-hem! after their
first existence in the world--hem! _our_ world I mean--hem! As to me,
I don't care for any thing or any body, and am always bored to death
here, a-hem! ar'n't you?"

"_C'est selon_," answered the comtesse in her most abrupt manner.

"Don't you know," cried Lady De Chere, "that there are a certain number
of people who live upon getting up scenes all their life? they are
always either fainting, or crying, or haranguing."

"It's very bad taste," rejoined Lord Baskerville, "at all events--hem!"
At this moment Lord Glenmore came up to his wife, betraying
considerable agitation, and inquiring tenderly of Lady Glenmore how
she felt, and speaking to her in a low voice of earnest solicitude; to
which she replied with answering affection.--Mr. Leslie Winyard moved
away, affecting more displeasure than he really felt.

"What a fuss Glenmore is in! Vulgar!--hem! I cannot conceive," said
Lord Baskerville, "why people should display their conjugal felicities
to the world."

"The old song, I think," observed Lord Raynham, who was passing by, and
overheard the remark, "gives good advice:--

    'Ne cherchez pas la quintessence;
     Contentez-vous de l'apparence.
     Qui veut trop voir, et trop savoir,
     Trouve souvent plus qu'il ne pense.'

"A polite inquiry, that did not enter into particulars, might perhaps
have suited better the interest of all parties, than that apparently
minute inspection of circumstances--eh! Baskerville?" with a sort of
sneering smile--"don't you agree with me?"

"Certainly, hem! nothing is so mistaken, or argues such want of
knowledge of the world, as to be _affairé_ about any thing."

"_To be_," observed the Comtesse Leinsengen, "is one ting, to _seem_ to
be is anoder: in dat lies de _savoir vivre_ or de no _savoir_. But did
I not hear my carriage was up?"

"Yes, comtesse; allow me to have the honour;" and she accepted his
offered arm and departed.

"D'Esterre," said Lord Glenmore, "I leave you to take care of Lady
Glenmore, whilst I go in quest of our carriage; your gallantry will, I
am sure, accept the charge."

Lord Albert felt really flattered, and would at any other time have
been happy to have such a post assigned to him, had it not been that
he feared in consequence to lose seeing Lady Adeline. This thought
gave his countenance an anxious, serious air, which the men around
did not fail to comment upon. But Mr. Leslie Winyard could scarcely
conceal his ill-humour. The husband to cross him was bad enough, but
another man, and that man Lord Albert D'Esterre, whom of all others
he most disliked, was gall and bitterness to him. He approached Lady
Glenmore, however, casting a look of insolence towards Lord Albert;
but the serious, preoccupied demeanour of the latter prevented his even
observing the impertinence intended for him.

Mr. Leslie Winyard now bent over Lady Glenmore, and whispered in her
ear. She listened with rather more complacency than Lord Albert seemed
to think was fitting, and she thanked Mr. Leslie Winyard for his care
with somewhat more of feeling than he thought the occasion merited; but
she spoke aloud, and seemed to avoid the whispered conversation which
the other affected to hold.

Lord Albert, however, who was the last man in the world to play the
mean part of a spy over the actions of any one, felt his situation
sufficiently awkward; and considering that his every wish was on the
wing after Lady Adeline, it became every instant more painful. He
almost determined on leaving Lady Glenmore; but then he thought Lord
Glenmore would naturally feel hurt at his doing so. Whilst weighing
this matter with himself, Lord Glenmore returned, announcing the
carriage to be at hand.

"D'Esterre, have the goodness to give your arm to Lady Glenmore on one
side, and I will take care of her on the other, and then we shall be
able, Georgina, to take you through the crowd without your suffering
any inconvenience." Mr. Leslie Winyard bit his lip with mortification,
and Lord Boileau said to him, with some degree of sarcasm,

"Really, Winyard, I think you _are_ ill used; after your services, to
see another preferred before you."

"Oh! _c'est la fortune de la guerre_," he replied, with an air of
_affected_ triumph; "but as for preference, _reste à savoir_."

"Upon my word, Winyard's coolness is admirable," said Lord Gascoigne,
"and I would bet an even hundred that he is right. Georgina, as he
calls her, I dare say understands a thing or two by this time, and
knows how to hoodwink Glenmore." No sooner had Lord Albert handed Lady
Glenmore into her carriage, than he returned swiftly, with a faint,
sickening hope that he might not yet be too late to catch at least one
precious look more of Adeline; nor was he disappointed, for he met
her suddenly, standing near the door with her party. Addressing Lady
Delamere with an _empressement_ of manner, and an intonation of voice,
that spoke the temper of his soul, his eyes fixed upon Lady Adeline's,
he scarcely knew what it was he said to Lady Delamere, till the extreme
coldness of the latter, and her marked asperity of reply, checked the
flow of his feelings, and he remained mute and abashed, when the silver
sound of Lady Adeline's voice, inquiring for Lady Glenmore, re-animated
him.

"The heat was overpowering," she observed, "and she could not be
surprised that any one had fainted; she herself had suffered from it."

Lord Albert made some answer, expressive of concern for her; and gazing
at her with unrepressed tenderness, he remarked the myrtle sprig in her
breast; for it was associated in his mind with some recollections that
made it, in his estimation, an object of infinite interest. At that
instant it dropped on the ground. He stooped to recover it hastily;
and as he half tendered to restore it to her, said, "Its freshness
was surprising, considering the atmosphere it had been in for so many
hours; yet not so, neither," he added, "when I remember where it has
been placed: but it is not worthy of such felicity. Allow me to retain
it, for I, at least, can envy and appreciate its happy fate." A glow
of lustrous joy illumined Lady Adeline's countenance; and if before
the agitation of doubt and sorrow had shook her frame, an emotion not
less intense, though proceeding from feelings the very opposite, now
affected her.

    "Far as distress the soul can wound,
      'Tis pain in each degree:
    'Tis bliss but to a certain bound;
      Beyond is agony."

Her emotion could not escape Lord Albert's observation, nor could
he mistake its cause. With all the warmth of renewed and genuine
affection, he again whispered to her,

"Adeline, will you be at home to-night if I come?"

Before she could reply, Lady Delamere's carriage was called. She turned
rather abruptly to Lady Adeline, saying, "Adeline, come; the carriage
waits;" and at the same instant Mr. Foley, who had been in quest of it,
joined them, as though in much haste.

"If you delay an instant, Lady Delamere," he said, "your carriage must
drive off, and then it is difficult to tell when you may get away."

"Adeline," cried Lady Delamere, speaking authoritatively, "take Mr.
Foley's arm." And at the same time courtesying coldly to Lord Albert,
she showed him his attendance was not desired, and hurried after her
niece and daughters; for Lady Adeline, confused and agitated, had only
time to cast a look at Lord Albert, and was in a manner obliged to
suffer herself to be led away by Mr. Foley.

Lord Albert stood for a moment like a statue: the sprig of myrtle,
however, was in his hand, or he might have fancied he had dreamed the
scene, so quickly had it passed. "What can this mean?" he said to
himself, lingering on the spot where Lady Adeline had parted from him,
quite unconscious of the crowd that passed by him in all directions.
But where is one more alone than in a crowd? His reverie, however, was
speedily broken in upon by hearing Lady Hamlet Vernon's name loudly
called; and the next instant, as she was passing, unattended, to go
out, she said to him:

"Do, Lord Albert, be so obliging as to give me your arm." In common
courtesy he complied; but it was mechanically, and like the action of
one in a dream. "You had better let me set you down, Lord Albert, if
your carriage is not up, or you will never get away." An anxious wish
to leave a scene in which he had now no interest, induced him to avail
himself of the proposal. He leaped in after her, and they drove rapidly
away. He said something expressive of thanks to her, of the crowd, of
the heat, of Lady Glenmore; and this brought them to Cleveland-row,
when their progress was stopped, and the clatter of horses, and
the crash of carriages, and the screams of women, and the oaths of
servants, resounded in all directions. Lord Albert hastily looked out,
and saw Lady Delamere's equipage, which had been forced out of the
line among other carriages, and, in order to disentangle itself, was
backing so as to come immediately parallel with Lady Hamlet Vernon's.
He was grateful to think it was not in any present danger at least;
but in lowering the glass and looking out to see what had occasioned
the disturbance, he had forgotten and left the myrtle sprig on the
seat of the carriage, and did not remark, in reseating himself, that
Lady Hamlet Vernon had taken it up and was holding it in her hand, so
absorbed was he in anxiety for Lady Adeline's possible danger.

Lady Delamere's carriage was by this time in contact with that of
Lady Hamlet Vernon's. Lord Albert was just about to put his head
again out of the window, to assure the former there was no danger,
when he saw Lady Adeline lean back suddenly in the carriage, and at
the same instant one of her cousins, as he thought, by her desire
quickly drew up the window, evidently to prevent all communication.
Lord Albert could not mistake this action. It perplexed and wholly
overthrew all his presence of mind; and under the painful pressure of
contending feelings he made some brief excuse to Lady Hamlet Vernon, of
endeavouring to see if the carriage could be extricated, and opening
the door he darted out, without any thought but that of yielding to the
impulse of his feelings, and proceeded home in a state of distraction.




CHAPTER VI.

INTRIGUE.


As soon as Lord Albert was alone, and could recall his scattered
senses, he reviewed every look and every gesture of Lady Adeline; and
notwithstanding all that passed at the drawing-room and subsequently,
notwithstanding the marked coldness and disapprobation which her manner
had of late implied, he yet thought that her real feelings were not
those, at least, of indifference towards him; and he resolved to try
the issue of calling in South Audley-street that evening, as he had
proposed to her.

For this purpose, he got away early from a ceremonious dinner which
he was obliged to attend, and which appeared to him to last longer
than any dinner had ever done before: and with his heart and head full
of Adeline, and of Adeline alone, he found himself once more in her
presence. Lady Delamere and her daughters, and one or two others, were
sitting around Lady Dunmelraise's couch, amusing her with accounts
of the drawing-room; but Lady Adeline was at the piano-forte, and
Mr. Foley sitting by her, with a certain indescribable air of being
established in his place by right.

At one glance of his eye, Lord Albert took in the whole room on
entering, together with the relative position of its occupants; and
his feelings underwent a sudden and painful revulsion. He advanced,
however, towards Lady Dunmelraise, who extended her hand to him, but in
a way that he could not mistake; and her coldness struck an additional
chill to his heart. From Lady Delamere and her daughters he met no
kindlier greeting; and he determined at once to try if Adeline's heart
was equally shut against him. For this purpose he moved towards her;
and although she could not see him, her back being turned to that
part of the room from whence he came, yet she heard his approaching
footstep, and trembled in every nerve.

Mr. Foley, who had followed Lady Hamlet Vernon's advice respecting his
own conduct, and who lost no opportunity in acting in conformity to
it, was now determined that he would not resign his seat or quit his
station near Lady Adeline. The latter, on her part, had been too much
agitated by her own feelings to see things in their true light; and
was glad of any person to talk to, in order to conceal her emotion. But
no artificial means were sufficiently powerful to still the beatings of
her heart; and when Lord Albert inquired after her health, saying, he
hoped she had not suffered from the morning's fatigue, she started at
the sound of his voice, although she expected to hear it, and made some
hurried reply, which he construed into a disdain of his inquiries.

Lord Albert, wretched and astonished, stood mute; questioning within
himself if this could really be the same Adeline whom he had a
few hours ago seen with such a different expression in her whole
countenance and demeanour, as to make him doubt the evidence of his
senses. He would at once have broken through the mystery, could he
have obtained her ear for a moment; but the presence of Mr. Foley,
who pertinaciously, and, as it appeared to Lord Albert, in defiance
of him, kept his place, prevented all explanation. And then again
returned those false conclusions which arose from jealous doubt; and
he conceived that it would be unworthy of himself even to seek an
explanation from one whose evident preference of another appeared to
him so very decided.

In this dark spirit of jealous indignation, he turned away, and
sank into gloomy silence. Could he have known what was passing in
Lady Adeline's breast, he would have acknowledged the justice of
her feelings; he would have seen that all which seemed coldness and
indifference was only the result of a proper sense of what she owed
herself; and that under that assumed demeanour lay hid the truest,
warmest love. Strange as it may appear on a slight review of the matter
(although it is the common infirmity of human nature never to see
its own defects), he was not aware of the effect which his constant
intercourse with Lady Hamlet Vernon produced on the minds of all those
who witnessed his intimacy with her; and, perhaps, as matters now
stood, even if he had been at one time inclined to own himself in the
wrong, the still greater dereliction from all truth and delicacy, which
he thought he discovered both in Lady Adeline and Lady Dunmelraise,
respecting their behaviour to him, completely exonerated him in his
opinion, and he lost all sense of the evil of his own conduct in
blaming theirs.

Little did Lord Albert dream (indeed, in the excitement of greater
things, he had totally forgotten it) that the sprig of myrtle which
Lady Adeline had given him that morning, and which had been apparently
the medium of so much mutual tenderness, had been seen by her in Lady
Hamlet Vernon's hand, when their carriages were entangled in coming
from the drawing-room. It was this circumstance, combined with Lord
Albert's being again in assiduous attendance on one whom she was now
compelled to consider in the light of a rival, that had made Lady
Adeline draw up the glass at the moment Lord Albert was about to speak
to her, in order to escape witnessing so painful a truth. As she threw
herself back in the carriage, and reflected on the unworthiness of his
conduct, she became the victim of the most agonizing feelings; for what
is so painful as the conviction of unworthiness in the object of our
love? and it was this conviction which had effected the alteration in
her manner towards him, which he could not but observe from the first
moment of his entering the room.

While she was actuated by these sentiments, Lord Albert, on his part,
writhed under the idea that Mr. Foley was his favoured rival, and that
he was only allowed to witness his triumph, in order that he might
be provoked to become the party who should break off the engagement
existing between him and Lady Adeline. But this he inwardly determined
should never be the case. He endeavoured, therefore, at the present
moment, to devour his chagrin, and force himself to converse on
indifferent topics; addressing himself, however, to Lady Dunmelraise,
rather than to Lady Adeline. Among others, he made allusion to the
_fête_ which was to take place at Avington Park the day after the
following, and expressed his regret that he had been unable to procure
the tickets which he had hoped to have presented to herself and Lady
Adeline; "a circumstance," he added, "which I consider very unfair,
since I was one of the original subscribers to this _fête_; but the
names of the parties to be inserted have been all chosen by ballot, and
my single voice alone did not prevail in obtaining the insertion of
those whom I wished to be on the list."

This was really the fact, however extraordinary it may appear. Lord
Albert, with the other persons who formed the committee appointed
to give and arrange this _fête_, had paid five hundred guineas each
towards defraying the expense, but not one of them had the power of
inviting any individual apart from the consent of the whole body; and
as Lady Dunmelraise and her daughter were not of that circle which Lady
Tilney and her _coterie_ considered to be _ton_, Lord Albert's wishes
on this point, which were perfectly sincere, had been wholly unattended
to. Under the circumstances, however, in which he stood in the opinion
of all those who now heard him, the exclusiveness of this measure could
not be comprehended or believed, and, in short, passed for a mere
deception.

His excuse, consequently, was received with great coldness by Lady
Dunmelraise, who only replied, "That, as to herself, her going was
quite out of the question; and as to her daughter," she added with
emphasis, "I dare say Adeline has no wish to be there." Here the
subject dropped; and Lord Albert, torn by a thousand contradictory
feelings, could no longer continue to play so painful a part as that
which he now saw devolved upon him. In this state of mind he quitted
Lady Dunmelraise's house, having bade her a cold adieu. Little did he
imagine it was for the last time.

If Lord Albert had exercised the power of sober reason, if the sorrow
he felt had been free from all reproach of conscience, he would not
have feared to look into his own breast, and would have sought counsel
from that best adviser, his own mind, in the quiet of his chamber; "for
a man's mind is wont to tell him more than seven watchmen that sit
upon a high tower." But miserably he had suffered many entanglements
to embarrass his steps, and direct them from the straight-forward
path. The natural consequence of this was, that his mind had become a
chaos, in which he distinguished nothing clearly; and in the bitterest
moments of suffering, instead of coolly resorting to his understanding,
as he once would have done, he now always sought to elude reflection
by plunging into crowds. Whenever we dread to be left alone with our
own thoughts, we are in peril. This melancholy change in Lord Albert's
character was one which the alteration in his mode of life, and his
associates, had in a short period of time effected.

Instead, therefore, of returning home when he left South Audley street,
Lord Albert drove to Lady Glenmore's, who was that night to receive the
_coterie_ of their peculiar circle for the first time at her own house.
There had been no little arrangement on Lady Tilney's part, as well
as on Lady Tenderden's, to give to Lady Glenmore's _soirée_ its full
effect in the annals of _ton_, by stamping it with that exclusive mark
of self-arrogated distinction, of which they considered themselves to
be the sum and seal.

No pains had been spared by these ladies, therefore, to render this
assemblage of persons select, according to their acceptation of the
meaning of the word, and, _pour trancher le mot_, as they said, to
exclude every one not on their own private lists, with the limited
exception of those _diplomates_ and official persons whom Lord
Glenmore's ministerial situation obliged them to permit Lady Glenmore
to invite.

At Glenmore House there was of course assembled, on the present
evening, the Tilneys, Leinsengens, Tenderdens, Boileaus, Gascoignes, De
Cheres, and the rest of the _élite_ who formed the _société choisie_ of
Lady Tilney; and as the latter looked around the apartments, and only
saw there those whom in fact _she_ had bidden, she was gratified with
this fresh accession of arbitrary power, and considered it no small
triumph thus to have set the seal of her supremacy over the yielding
Lady Glenmore, who might, under other circumstances, if she had not
been an ally, have proved a formidable enemy. As it was, Lady Tilney
expressed the sense of her satisfaction by a thousand _cajoleries_,
which one woman knows so well to practise upon another when it suits
her purpose. She praised Lady Glenmore's dress (that touchstone of
female friendship), although she could not help saying apart to Lady
Tenderden, that it was a pity Lady Glenmore still persisted in her
_baroque_ modes, which in fact were no modes at all, but contrivances
of her own. To herself, Lady Tilney however next observed, that Lady
Glenmore's choice of society was excellent, and that the manner in
which she had arranged her rooms was managed with infinite taste.

These approving, encouraging speeches, from one so versed in the
knowledge of the world, and so much looked up to as the arbiter of the
elegancies of life, together with all the other incense of flattery
which was lavished upon Lady Glenmore on every side, could not fail of
taking some effect on her mind. Young, fair, unformed in character,
brought up by fond and indulgent parents, who thought she never could
err, and who had miserably neglected to implant those religious
principles in her breast which alone give stability to character, which
impart strength by making us aware of our own weakness, Lady Glenmore
was launched on a scene where dangers surrounded her in every shape,
and which she was wholly unprepared either to foresee or to sustain.
Gentle, amiable,--as yet pure, and unsuspicious of evil, from being
herself free from it,--she was a fitting subject to be moulded into any
shape by any evil-designing person that knew gradually to undermine
her innocence without alarming her fears. Lady Glenmore's situation in
the world, therefore, with a husband incessantly employed in public
duties, consequently often absent, while she was thrown in the midst of
a peculiar society, which became, from various circumstances, her only
sphere of action, was one of infinite temptation and peril.

At first, as was seen, she mourned over the deprivation of her
husband's presence,--a husband whom she loved with child-like
tenderness; but time, _ton_, and necessity, soon softened down this
infantine regret, and merely at first as a solace for the pain she
endured in being absent from him, she entered on the routine of
dissipated pleasure which presented itself to her on all sides. No
wonder, then, that those worldly pursuits, which were at first resorted
to as palliatives for pain, became gradually habitual and necessary to
her; and it is the fatal but inevitable consequence of such a habit of
life, to unfit the capacity (even the best and most vigorous capacity)
for any higher or nobler aim.

In the thoughtless vivacity of her age, alive to the zest of gaiety and
pleasure, her better qualities lay dormant; and in this Circean circle
her beauty and her youth were certain passports to general admiration,
independently of all the adventitious circumstances by which she was
environed. On the present occasion, when for the first time she opened
her house, she appeared the presiding spirit that gave life, animation,
and novelty even to the _blasé_ and hackneyed beings around her.
Had Lady Glenmore used, without abusing, the many advantages of her
brilliant station, she would not have been to blame, whatever may be
said by gloomy ascetics; nor would they have had power to lead her into
danger, had she possessed the stay and guide which a husband's constant
presence in society always affords.

This, however, was not _her_ case; and the very nature of her ingenuous
and guileless disposition became, in her present circumstances, an
additional source of danger, since it rendered her the easy prey of the
experienced and practised in deception, by too many of whom she was
surrounded, and who, envious of that purity they affected to despise,
were restless agents in endeavouring to reduce it to their own corrupt
level. It was from some such motive as this, rather than from any
impulse of love or passion, that Mr. Leslie Winyard first paid Lady
Glenmore attention. He was clever, and knew well how to be prodigal of
assiduities to the one object of his pursuit, in contradistinction to
the contempt in which he apparently held all others. This flatters
the vanity of the individual to whom they are addressed, and proves a
ready passport to a woman's smiles, particularly when experiencing that
perfect _délaissement_ which is most felt in a crowd, where "there is
none to bless us, none whom we can bless."

Under these circumstances Lady Glenmore first listened to Mr. Leslie
Winyard; and that advantage once gained, he had art enough to avail
himself of it as a step towards intimacy. In a very short space of
time, he so far succeeded as to raise at least a _bruit sourd_ of
his being _l'objet préféré_; an idea which at this period, could any
real friend of Lady Glenmore's have suggested to her, she would have
started from with indignation; but as it was, she continued laughing
and talking on the present occasion with Mr. Leslie Winyard. Had she
overheard the observations made upon her by various persons, more
particularly those of Lady De Chere and Lord Boileau, she might have
learned a lesson which she was destined to buy at a higher price.

"Well, for a _debutante_," said Lord Boileau, "I think _la petite_
Georgina has made considerable progress in her career. And how does
Glenmore take it?"

"Oh!" replied Lady De Chere, "as every one does what they cannot help,
I suppose. Besides, doubtless, he has other things to think of, and
must feel glad to have escaped her childish fondness: it must have
been exceedingly tiresome; and, after all, the sooner a matrimonial
understanding is settled upon a right and proper footing, the better
for both parties."

"Very true, Lady De Chere; and nobody settles those matters so well as
yourself; you are a model for all married ladies; so much _retenu_, so
much _bienséance_, and such a lady-like way of doing exactly what you
choose, and allowing De Chere to do the same. It is the only way for
married persons to be comfortable, or _comme il faut_."

"I am glad you think so, for that has long ago been Lady Boileau's
opinion," replied Lady De Chere, with one of her most contumelious
smiles, and left Lord Boileau to the satisfaction of his reflections on
domestic happiness.

"Pardon me," said Lord Baskerville, gently pulling him aside, and
conducting the Comtesse Leinsengen to the other apartment, "but
_en qualité de preux_, hem! I must be permitted to say, _Place aux
dames_--a-hem!"

"Oh! my reveries," rejoined Lord Boileau, "were on very every-day
topics; they can be resumed at any time; and I am happy in the honour
of--"

"Getting out of de way," quickly interrupted the Comtesse, who had the
happy knack of cutting all long speeches short, "_milles graces_:"
and she glided past him with a sliding bow, adding aside to Lord
Baskerville, "I would always make my best thanks to him for dat; he is
quite a dullification. _Mais voilà du nouveau_," she went on to say, in
the same breath, looking towards Lady Glenmore and Mr. Leslie Winyard,
who were still conversing; "dat is always de way with your English
virtuosos; dey go _grand train_ when dey do go. You are an odd people
altogether; always _en caricatura_. _Et le mari farouche apprivoisé!_
quite used to it already! Well, he is more sensible dan I took him for;
_vogue la galère_." And by this time she had approached close to Lady
Glenmore with her sliding step.--"I wished to make you my courtesy,
and pay you my compliments on the brilliancy of your _soirée_; and I
am happy to see you did not suffer more from your indisposition at
the drawing-room. Indeed, I am sure you could not, for I never saw
you looking more _triomphante_ than to-night. That heat was enough to
kill one; but you had only a _vapeur_; and I assure you it was quite
becoming: was it not, Lord Baskerville?"

"Oh, done in excellent style, as all that Lady Glenmore does must
be--a-hem! quite in good taste; no distortions or hysterics or vulgar
violences; all suavity and gentleness--a-hem! never saw so beautiful a
specimen of feint in my life--hem!"

At that moment Lord D'Esterre came up to make his bow to Lady Glenmore,
and the Comtesse Leinsengen walked abruptly away, saying, "De very
sight of dat man gives me what you call de blue and de green devils."

But Lady Hamlet Vernon was quite of a different opinion; she had long
been a fixture in the door-way, looking anxiously for his arrival. It
was late when he came, and she sought to attract his attention, and
engage him in conversation. Solicitous as she was to learn the cause of
his having left her in such an unaccountable manner in Cleveland-row,
she did not immediately enter upon that subject, but said something
expressive of a general interest in his welfare, and of concern at
seeing him look unwell. He eluded her inquiries, and professed being in
perfect health; but she was evidently aware that his mind had undergone
some sudden change since she had seen him at the drawing-room, for he
no longer spoke in the abstracted manner he had done when there, but
joined with an apparent animation and interest in a conversation which
she dexterously led to topics that she knew to be most in accordance
with his tastes and habits, and particularly so when he was depressed
and under the influence of blighted feelings; at which times he never
failed to seek refuge in dreams of ambition and power.

Though Lord Albert D'Esterre had never yet arrived at that degree
of intimacy with Lady Hamlet Vernon which might have induced him to
open his whole heart to her, on its dearest interests, yet there
always seemed to him to be a tacit and delicate understanding of his
sentiments, which he felt was soothing, and believed was sincere;
while, on her part, there was a consummate art in appearing to
compassionate his disappointment, while, at the same time, she never
failed in administering some baneful suspicion, or insinuating some
deteriorating observation on the character and conduct of Lady Adeline
and her mother, in respect to their behaviour towards himself.

Had Lady Hamlet Vernon, by any incautious or violent language, betrayed
her own malignant feelings, his eyes would have been at once unsealed;
but all she said was so well adapted to effect what she intended, to
throw his mind into a sea of doubts, and yet leave no suspicion of her
intending to do so, that he yielded, by degrees, an unwilling belief
to this sapping, undermining influence, so totally destructive of his
peace.

While listening to discourse of this kind, their conversation was
interrupted by Lord Raynham's addressing Lady Hamlet Vernon as he
passed her, putting some common-place question (to which, however, he
did not wait to hear an answer) about the ensuing breakfast, and then
he walked on, talking to himself as usual.

Lady Hamlet Vernon turned quickly to Lord Albert, saying, "Of course
you _must_ be there!"

He replied vaguely, apparently not knowing what he was saying; and it
was evident to Lady Hamlet Vernon, that, for some reason or other, the
mention of the breakfast raised in his mind a perplexity of thoughts,
for he relapsed into an abstracted mood, and became perfectly silent.
She was too wary to make any direct observation upon this, and too much
accustomed to the fluctuation of his spirits not to know that they
must be suffered to ebb and flow without animadversion on her part, if
she desired to maintain her influence over him; but she determined
secretly to trace the cause of this sudden change to its source, and
felt sure that there was something connected with the breakfast of
higher interest to him than itself. She endeavoured to regain his
attention by turning her conversation into other channels; but in vain:
the spell was on him, and soon afterwards he glided from her side and
left the assembly.

Lady Glenmore's party was prolonged to a late hour, and when the people
began to move, a considerable time elapsed before they could all
depart. To dissipate the _ennui_ of these last moments, Lady Glenmore
went to her piano-forte, and, in that excitement of spirit which the
incense of flattery and the consciousness of worldly success inspires,
she sang in her very best manner and in her most brilliant style,
and was herself so absorbed in the sweet sounds she made, that she
perceived not that the last of her visitors was gone, till, on looking
up, she beheld no one save Mr. Leslie Winyard leaning over her chair.
Abashed and somewhat confused, she scarce knew why, Lady Glenmore
was about to rise, when Mr. Winyard entreated her just to finish the
romance. "It is only two stanzas more," he said, in his most entreating
and persuasive tone. Fluttered, and not wishing to show she was so,
she thought it better to comply, and endeavour to recover herself while
singing. In this she succeeded to a certain degree; and having sang the
two stanzas he pleaded for, she arose with an intention of immediately
retiring, when Mr. Leslie Winyard, who had always _l'apropos du moment_
at command, contrived again to arrest her departure, by starting some
question which she could not avoid answering, and then proceeding to
further converse; while Lady Glenmore, on her part, caught by the
glitter of his wit, was amused, and laughed in gaiety of spirit.

This scene had continued fully half an hour after every body had left
the room, when Lord Boileau, who had been one of the last to go away,
made his reappearance suddenly in the apartment where they were sitting.

"I beg you a thousand million of pardons, Lady Glenmore; I am sadly
afraid I--I have intruded. I am vastly unfortunate; I must seem
exceedingly impolite; quite accidental, I assure you. The truth is,
my carriage did not arrive, and rather than wait any longer in the
room below, I ventured to come up stairs again. You will, I trust,
therefore, pardon my reappearance. But, Winyard, if your carriage is
waiting, as I believe it has been for some time, will you allow it to
set me down, and I will send it back immediately?"

"Oh yes!" cried Leslie Winyard, "with the greatest pleasure; by all
means."--And Lord Boileau turned to go away as he spoke. Lady Glenmore
happily, at the moment, felt the awkwardness of her situation, and
had sufficient presence of mind to say, "Stop, Lord Boileau, I beg.
Mr. Leslie Winyard, I must make my adieus, and wish you good night.
I am afraid you will find it dull waiting alone till Lord Boileau's
carriage returns." She said this with a determination of manner which
sufficiently proved to Mr. Leslie Winyard that he ought to depart,
and not press matters further at that time. He bowed, therefore, and
whispering something in her ear with an appearance of familiarity,
reluctantly took his leave.

As he joined Lord Boileau on the staircase, the latter said to him,
in a low tone, "You will never forgive me, Winyard, I fear, for this
interruption; but how very cleverly the Glenmore turned it off! I give
her great credit for her address."

Leslie Winyard made no answer, but smiled complacently, and in a manner
that left little doubt of the innuendo which he wished his silence to
convey; while he inwardly triumphed in the assurance, that he had in
Lord Boileau a willing witness and ready herald of all he could wish to
be believed.




CHAPTER VII.

THE TICKET.


The allusion made by Lord Albert D'Esterre on the preceding evening
to the _fête_ at Avington Park, his excuses and explanations on the
subject of the ticket, together with Lady Dunmelraise's doubtful mode
of receiving them, were circumstances not lost on Mr. Foley; and the
hope that he might not only please Lady Adeline by the attention, but
also, in the event of his success, tacitly throw suspicion on Lord
Albert's sincerity, determined him on endeavouring to procure her,
himself, a ticket for the _fête_.

Consequently, at an early hour the following morning, he sought Lady
Hamlet Vernon, to request her assistance in the accomplishment of
his wishes. The latter possessed too much penetration not to see, in
Mr. Foley's anxiety, an elucidation of the disquiet and uneasiness
betrayed by Lord Albert D'Esterre when the subject of the breakfast
had been accidentally alluded to at Lady Glenmore's by Lord Raynham;
and imagined that she perceived, at once, a point where her own wishes
might be advanced, at the same time that she appeared attending only
to those of the friend who now applied to her. If it was clear to Lady
Hamlet Vernon that some misunderstanding, some unpleasant feeling, had
existed in Lord Albert's mind, connected with the subject, no better
or surer index of it could be found, than in the eager and pressing
solicitude displayed on the same point by the person whom she had
herself principally influenced in the attempt to become his rival; and
to procure the ticket so much wished for (if a possibility of doing
so remained) was therefore the immediate conclusion in Lady Hamlet
Vernon's mind.

In individuals similarly constituted, an explanation of sentiment, or
even of design, is not always requisite; an intuitive principle seems
to guide to the same point, and directs them generally to the use of
the same means; and no interpretation of his wishes was necessary on
the part of Mr. Foley, in the present instance, to ensure him the
earnest co-operation of Lady Hamlet Vernon. The conversation which
had passed on a former occasion between them, on the subject of Lord
Albert D'Esterre's engagement with Lady Adeline, and the result hinted
at of Mr. Foley's probable success, if disposed to hazard his suit,
was alone sufficient to produce an understanding throughout all future
manœuvres in the proceeding, and without a word passing to that
effect: therefore, on the occasion in question, Mr. Foley felt that he
left his application in Lady Hamlet Vernon's hands with a well-founded
assurance of its accomplishment, as far, at least, as her exertions
could promote such an issue.

In a few hours the ticket was procured and transmitted. On receiving
it, Mr. Foley proceeded, with a feeling approaching to triumph, to
South Audley-street; and in presenting it to Lady Dunmelraise, said
something about his happiness in offering what he thought would be
agreeable to Lady Adeline, and his hope that some other opportunity
would afford itself of proving that her wishes were always laws to him;
at the same time, to enhance his air of importance, throwing out hints
(as if carelessly) respecting the small number of persons who were to
constitute the _fête_, and the peculiarities attending its management,
all which insinuated the distinction attached to such as were amongst
the _prièes_. Lady Dunmelraise looked expressively at her daughter,
as she held the ticket in her hand; as though she would have said,
Lord Albert could not procure one; and Lady Adeline, who had sat like
a statue, not daring to trust herself to speak, lest she should betray
her feelings, now felt this silent appeal too much for endurance, and
sought her chamber, there to indulge in an unrepressed burst of sorrow.
"Yes," she cried, in broken utterance, as sobs choked her voice; "yes,
he is faithless, perfidious, and I--I am wretched."

While Lady Adeline gave way to this natural transport of wounded
feeling, her mother guessed too well what her poor child was suffering,
and though she suffered with her, yet she could, in the comparative
calmness of _her_ regret, consider how it was best to act; and Lady
Dunmelraise determined on the propriety and expediency of Adeline going
to the breakfast. She therefore continued to converse with Mr. Foley,
in order to settle all the necessary arrangements, saying,

"But by whom is Adeline to be _chaperoned_? There do not seem to be
many of our acquaintance going, unless, indeed, Lady Borrowdaile, Lady
Aveling, or Lady Feuillemorte; yet she would, I think, prefer Lady
Aveling."

"Pardon me," rejoined Mr. Foley; "none of those ladies are invited."

"Indeed! you astonish me! But the Duchess D'Hermanton; she, at least,
cannot be left out?"

"Her grace's name, I know, is not on the list," replied Mr. Foley.

"That is astonishing! Which of the nobility, then, now in London, are
to be of this party?"

"Those," answered Mr. Foley, "who are of the _scelta_."

"And pray who are those?" He named the Boileaus, De Cheres, Tenderdens,
Tilneys, Leinsengens, &c. &c. Lady Dunmelraise smiled, and then looked
rather grave.

"This would be laughable," she said, "if it were not melancholy to
think, that people can suffer themselves to be so led away by a love of
false distinction, as to attempt to set aside all that is truly good
and great, and to impose laws and rules upon society, whose general
tendency cannot be productive of any real advantage, but the reverse."
Mr. Foley affected to agree with her in part, but said, "There was
always, at all times, something of the same sort existing. It was a
species of excrescence," he said, "which grew out of the plethora
of the London world. It might be dangerous for some; but for Lady
Adeline--he conceived she might look at its folly, and _effleuré_ the
charm of its novelty and splendour, without the least danger."

"It is from this persuasion," rejoined Lady Dunmelraise, "that I can
augur no harm in her attending the breakfast, although I should be
sorry to see her always forming a component part of such a society.
But whom can she accompany on the present occasion? Is Lady Louisa
Blithewaite going?"

"She is: as a sister of the Duke of Mercington's, she has been
admitted."

"That will do," said Lady Dunmelraise. "She is the very person under
whose care I should like my Adeline to be placed. I will write to
her directly." Mr. Foley, who began to fear that after all he should
not carry his point, was now delighted; and he took leave of Lady
Dunmelraise, well pleased with the prospect of his success. When Lady
Dunmelraise had despatched her note to Lady Louisa Blithewaite, she
sought Lady Adeline in her chamber, whom she found in some measure calm
and composed.

"You see how it is, my dearest child; but your painful task will soon
be over, I trust. It is suspense only that is not to be borne, since
it prevents the mind from resting on any one point, or coming to any
conclusion; and it is for this very reason, my loved Adeline, that I
wish you to summon resolution and attend the breakfast. It is right
Lord Albert should know that we are aware of the idle subterfuge he
wished to palm upon our belief; and it is well, too, for your future
peace, that you should so convince yourself of his dereliction of all
honourable principle, that you will not in any after-moment fancy that
you have forfeited all happiness in losing him." By these and similar
reasonings and persuasions, Lady Dunmelraise convinced her daughter
that she ought to comply with her wishes, and prepare to meet this
painful trial. Having, therefore, given way to the infirmity of human
weakness only so far as that indulgence was necessary to a recovery of
self-management, Lady Adeline rallied her powers of mental control;
and with that steady serenity and determination of character which
proceeds from one only source, and which bears up those who act upon
its influence through all the storms of life, she acceded to whatever
Lady Dunmelraise required of her.

In the course of that day, Lord Albert called in South Audley-street;
but neither Lady Adeline nor her mother were at home. In the
distempered state of his mind, he thought he had been denied, and in
this idea he was almost confirmed by seeing Mr. Foley leave the house
a few moments after he had ridden from the door; though, in fact, this
was not the case, the latter having merely gone into the drawing-room
a short time before Lord Albert called, to leave a note explanatory of
some points respecting the hour of going to the _fête_, &c. &c. and
which Lady Dunmelraise had requested him to ascertain. The effect,
however, produced upon Lord Albert's imagination was the same as if
the fact had been so; and in this effervescence of mind he directed
his horse's head, with a feeling of something like habit, towards Lady
Hamlet Vernon's.

When the heart is bruised, and the understanding perplexed, it is
astonishing to think how the strongest minds turn to lean on some one
being whom they deem willing to soothe and share in their feelings;
and if it is a weakness, it is one so linked to all the best parts of
our nature, that there would be no advantage gained by exchanging it
for that cold hardness of self-sufficiency, to which some persons lay
claim as affording them a superiority over their fellow-creatures. Such
was certainly not Lord Albert's case. Whatever he might or might not
confess to himself, it was with a worn-out spirit that he sought Lady
Hamlet Vernon; and on hearing that she was at home, he threw himself
off his horse, and hastened into her presence. Although she was too
well skilled in reading the human heart, not to be aware that she owed
this visit rather to his displeasure in other quarters, than from a
spontaneous wish to enjoy her society, yet she received him, as she
always did, with those gentle smiles which captivate the heart, and
which is the temper ever sought for and expected in woman.

Lady Hamlet Vernon knew that the general selfishness of man seeks
only the reflection of his own sensations from the sympathy of women;
and that whatever cause a woman may have of pain or pleasure, it is
_his_ feelings, and not her own, which she must consult, soothe, and
influence; and that, in short, when she ceases to be his sunshine, he
ceases to court her influence.

It was acting under this conviction, which made Lady Hamlet Vernon,
with infallible delicacy and truth of tact, neither seem to search into
secrets which Lord Albert did not choose to reveal, nor yet appear
carelessly ignorant of the melancholy restlessness by which she saw
him affected; but alternately she soothed, flattered, and sympathized
in all he said, till at last she succeeded, for the time being, in
reconciling him with himself, and in a great measure allaying the
irritation of those various feelings which almost distracted him when
he first entered her apartment.

Before he took his leave, it was finally arranged between them, that
he should accompany her to the _fête_ the next day, if he could leave
Downing-street in time; and if he could not, he would, he said, meet
her at Avington Park, and go there with Lord Glenmore, who, in the
event of his being detained, would be detained also.

While thus variously agitated had been the feelings of some, whose
hearts, by circumstances, had become interested in this idle _fête_,
the principal movers in it, in _their_ way, were not less anxious for
its success and brilliancy. For the preservation of its exclusive and
chosen character, and the arrangement of all its endless detail of
luxury, each member of the _société choisie_ was more or less busy
and _affairé_. Lady Tilney, with her usual activity, was the first
in her exertions; driving to the houses of all connected with the
arrangements, examining into every minute particular, and, above all,
guarding against the possibility of any persons whose name was not
on her list creeping in through the weakness of some member of the
committee, who, in a moment of unallowed natural feeling, might have
invited a sister, or a mother, or a brother, who were from a class
_without the pale_.

At Lady Ellersby's she met Lady Tenderden, and the Countess Leinsengen,
and Lady De Chere, and Lord Boileau, who came in, as though by chance,
one after the other, each saying, in different words, the same thing.

"How fortunate I am to have met you! I wished to know at what hour you
are to go to Avington Park to-morrow;" and all applied to Lady Tilney.
She named three o'clock.

"La!" cried Lady Ellersby, "I shall not have awoke from my first sleep
at that hour: surely four o'clock is quite time enough."

"_I_ shall not go till den," cried the Comtesse Leinsengen. "One has
always enough of dose tings dat last for ever. Breakfast, dinner,
supper, and den breakfast again, before one gets away."

"Oh! but you know," replied Lady Tenderden, "dis _fête_, my dear
comtesse, is not like any other; dere will be no one dere but
ourselves, our own _société_; and dere are so many pleasant tings to be
done,--going on de water, walking about, and de _loterie_; one would
not choose to lose dat."

"Oh! certainly not," exclaimed Lady Boileau. "I am told there are to be
some exceedingly magnificent things. Lord Albert D'Esterre has bought
some really fine jewels."

"Perhaps so," said Lady De Chere in her blunt way; "but we all know
_who_ will have these: the chances are wisely ordained _beforehand_."

"Have you got your _billet de loterie_?" asked the Comtesse Leinsengen
of the speaker.

"No," replied Lady De Chere with an air of pique, "but I _am_ to have
one."

"Certainly," rejoined Lady Tilney, who read the Comtesse's intended
triumph; and who chose to show her, on many occasions, that if any one
had a right to tyrannize it was herself, or that at least, if such a
thing were attempted, it should be _à qui mieux mieux_.

"Certainly, Lady Boileau, there will be a lottery ticket for _you_, and
all the _other_ ladies; at least, I shall conceive it exceedingly wrong
indeed if there is not. But should there be any mistake, depend upon
_my_ rectifying it. And now, ladies," she continued, addressing them
generally, "there is one point we have not touched upon--our costume."

"Oh! _demi-toilette_, of course," exclaimed Lady Tenderden.

"Of course," echoed Lady Tilney, afraid lest it should be thought
that she had asked the question with a view to arrange her own dress
according to her friends' dictation: "but I meant, should we have a
_change_ of dress for the evening?"

"Oh! what a trouble!" said Lady Ellersby.

"Yes, my dear; but you know, after walking about all day, our dress
will not look fresh for the evening," said Lady Boileau. "However, I
am told, that among other _galanteries_ our cavaliers have engaged a
certain number of milliners, to be in attendance with every kind of
decoration, so that we need think little on that point."

"No, really!" cried Lady Ellersby, with something more than her usual
animation: "that is well imagined."

"And I will tell you," said Lady Tenderden, "what is the prettiest
ting of all, de best imagined possible,--every lady is to have her
cipher formed of her chosen flower. As to me, I shall be like Louis
de Fourteenth's favourite, and am to have _un salon tout tapissé de
jonquilles_. After all is said, dere is nobody but the French dat know
what it is to be gallant. And now, _mes chères dames_, I must depart.
If any thing occurs, any change takes place, you will let me know. You
have all settled your parties for going, of course: mine has been long
arranged wid de Glenmores and Mr. Leslie Winyard. Adieu, adieu!"

"Of course," said the Comtesse Leinsengen: "mi ladi need not to have
taken de pains to inform us on dat subject."

"I think," said Lady Tilney, "considering that this party is made
expressly by _us_, and is quite a thing apart, that she might have
passed over for once her tiresome preference of every thing French. But
she is always making out that it is the French alone who do every thing
in perfection; and that is exceedingly impolite, to say the least of
it."

"Very true," added Lady De Chere; "and considering that she is what she
is by having married an Englishman, _c'est un peu fort_."

"But," said Lady Tilney, breaking abruptly off, "I must say adieu.
_Chère_ Lady Ellersby, adieu! Remember! three o'clock, at the latest,
to-morrow. And we positively can allow no more tickets. No persuasions
or entreaties must be suffered to prevail. The affair is finished. I
have put my veto on the D'Hermanton," she added, turning round as she
approached the door: "that would have been too much."

"I wonder," said Lady Ellersby, as Lady Tilney left the room, "that she
is not dead with fatigue. Surely never any body did so much."

"To so little purpose," said the Comtesse Leinsengen sharply; "for,
after all, de public of your nation are a great deal too _revêche_ to
let any one person lead dem about _à droite et à gauche_. Much better
it is to cut de matter short, to have one's own _société_, and never
care what any body says or does or tinks. Please oneself one's own way,
dat is de true liberty. But dat ladi has so _many fire-irons_ all going
at once, some of dem must fail, and den she is out of humour."

There was a general smile at what the comtesse had said; and they all
enjoyed hearing Lady Tilney found fault with, though no one exactly
chose to be the person who should hazard such an opinion.

"Ah! comtesse," observed Lady Boileau, "you are the most amusing person
in the world."

"_Seulement parce que je suis la plus franche_," she replied; and
kissing her hand to Lady Ellersby, glided out of the room.

"If she had said _brusque_, instead of _franche_," cried Lady De
Chere, "she would have been nearer the truth."

"Eh, eh, eh!" laughed Lady Ellersby, as she observed, "Perhaps so; but
it is like smelling salts to hear her remarks; and really I do not know
what I should do without something pungent now and then to keep me
awake."

"Besides," rejoined Lady Boileau, "we have all our own particular
meanings for particular phrases; and Comtesse Leinsengen is not the
only person who gives her own meaning to a phrase which, in its general
acceptation, is of quite a different import. Don't you agree with me,
Lady De Chere?"

"May be so. But in as far as regards myself, I always mean what I
say, though I do not say always all that I mean. But we are quite
philosophical, and I have no time for disquisitions; so, fair ladies,
good day, and may to-morrow be propitious for hats, caps, and
_falbalas_. In that we are all agreed. Farewell!" And she departed.

"My dear Lady Ellersby," said Lady Boileau, approaching her in a voice
of earnest entreaty, "do not let Lady Tilney forget my lottery-ticket;
for, after all, you know, one likes to have a _chance_ of the fine
things."

"Oh yes! ONE does. I will not forget. Trust to me."

"You are always _so_ good-humoured! Adieu, then, _till_ to-morrow! I
know you will not forget me."

"Not if you can prevent it," said Lady Ellersby to herself, as she
closed the door, and rose to ring her bell. "Send Fanchon to me." And
when Fanchon, the maid, obeyed the summons, her mistress said, "I
am half dead with the clamour of those dear friends of mine. Put my
_roquelaure_ over me, and let me sleep. See that I be not disturbed.
How loud they did all talk!"




CHAPTER VIII.

THE BREAKFAST.


Every one has felt, some time or other, that when the first warmth of
indignation against a loved object begins to cool, the recollection of
a thousand tender reminiscences comes floating in to soften and subdue
resentment; and that many an ebb and flow of fondness must take place
before the deep trace of love is washed from our remembrance. Thus it
was with Lady Adeline: there was a lurking weakness in her heart (if
the tenacity of true love can he called a weakness), which made her
loath to cast Lord Albert thence, even if he _were_ guilty, for the
moment, of deserting her.

Even in that case she thought he might be reclaimed. It was difficult,
it was impossible, to fathom the heart: who had a right to do so? and
with these thoughts she condemned herself as wrong and precipitate in
her judgment. The best, she conceived, that remained for her to do,
under her present painful circumstances, would be to retire to the
country, and await there the issue of his determination; but not to
brave him. Under the impression of these feelings, she lamented having
yielded her consent to be present at the breakfast.

"If I am to see him there," she exclaimed inwardly, "devoted to
another, what good end will it answer thus to add anguish to anguish?
And, at all events, Albert will think better of me if I avoid his
presence, and, by so doing, show how much I feel, and how little I am
desirous of prying into his conduct."

Lady Dunmelraise soon saw that such were the feelings of her daughter,
when, in the course of the day, a recurrence was made to the subject
of the breakfast; and it was with pleasure that she received a visit
from her sister, Lady Delamere, in the evening, from the hope that her
persuasions, joined to those which she had already availed herself of,
might have additional weight with Lady Adeline.

Many concurring circumstances had led both Lady Dunmelraise and Lady
Delamere to the conviction that Lord Albert was wholly undeserving of
such a treasure, and induced the suspicion that he perhaps enjoyed the
consciousness of being beloved by her daughter, while, at the same
time, he played with her feelings, and sacrificed them remorselessly
at the shrine of his own vanity. To impress their opinions upon her
Adeline's mind, Lady Dunmelraise conceived to be absolutely necessary,
with a view to wean her from her strong attachment: and so convinced
was she of the necessity of this measure, in order to restore Lady
Adeline to any thing like happiness, that much as it pained Lady
Dunmelraise to make her herself the witness of Lord Albert's desertion
and insincerity, yet she felt convinced that to do so would be at once
the kindest and most effectual measure.

In this she was confirmed by Lady Delamere; and with all the persuasion
of affection, and all the force of truth, they both represented the
matter in so strong a light to Lady Adeline, that she yielded her
feelings to their direction, saying,

"Well, dearest mamma and dearest aunt, make of me what you will, do
with me as you choose; but remember I am a poor automaton that can no
longer act or think for itself. I feel crushed, withered, wretched,
unable to do any thing but yield a passive obedience. In that I know I
am fulfilling my duty; and if I live, that thought must bring peace in
its train."

"_If_ you live!" exclaimed Lady Dunmelraise, shuddering, as she looked
earnestly at her altered countenance. "Dearest child! talk not thus:"
and as she pressed her to her breast, she felt that she must evermore
consider Lord Albert as the destroyer of her child's happiness. At
an early hour that evening, Lady Adeline retired to rest; and worn
out with the agitation of the day, yet calmed by the secret sense
of satisfaction which a fulfilment of duty and obedience to a loved
and loving parent never fails to produce, she fell into that sweet,
child-like sleep of innocence which is the balm of peace.

The morning came in lowering, and a few heavy drops of rain seemed to
announce the impending overthrow of the splendour of the _fête_; but
about midday the dark clouds broke away, and the sun came out clear
and bright, giving assurance of fair weather. By three o'clock, the
park, and the squares and streets in its immediate vicinity, presented
a gay sight in the splendid equipages that were waiting at the doors,
or driving to the destined scene of the rendezvous. Lady Adeline had
suffered herself to be attired in the dress her mother had prepared
for her, which was well adapted for the hour and scene, and at once
splendid, yet chastely beautiful: and as something of the natural
weakness of youth and vanity found a brief place even in the breast of
the ingenuous Adeline, a consciousness of her charms stole over her, as
she cast a rapid glance at her person reflected in her mirror, and she
thought with a feeling of something like renovated hope and pleasure;
"He may not deem me so beneath his attention." And then again a quick
return of reflection made her sigh; remembering how valueless the
affection is, how undeserving the name, which depends alone on personal
charms. But still a secret hope remained, that if she could once again
attract his regards, she might find the way to retain them on a sure
foundation.

As this hope, in despite of reason, took possession of her heart, it
tinged her cheek with a brighter hue, and gave an animation to her
whole appearance which even deceived those who loved her most. There
was a feeling of exultation in Lady Dunmelraise's breast, as she gazed
delightedly on this dear object of her solicitude; for conscious
that the gem within was as precious as the fair casket in which it
was enshrined, she thought that Lord Albert little knew his own true
interests in exchanging such a pearl of price for common merchandise;
and she was right.

When Lady Adeline arrived at Lady Louisa Blithewaite's, she found a
party assembled there, amongst whom were the Duke of Mercington and
Mr. Foley. The former was exceedingly struck with her appearance,
and manifested his admiration in a way not to be overlooked or
misunderstood, at the same time with all that delicacy which was due to
the person by whom it was excited. Lady Louisa Blithewaite received her
with marks of the greatest interest; and relieved the embarrassment she
felt on perceiving herself the object of general remark, by entering
immediately into discourse with her on various subjects connected with
the immediate object of their meeting.

As soon as the first awkwardness was passed, Lady Adeline recovered her
presence of mind, and joined in the conversation with that natural yet
cultivated understanding which is felt in touching on the most trivial
topics, as well as in discussing the most serious ones, and never fails
to win admiration and respect. Mr. Foley hovered around her, sometimes
leaning on the back of her chair, and affecting to speak to her with
the familiarity of intimacy; alluding to times and circumstances
of which the present company were ignorant, and endeavouring, by
this conduct, to wear the appearance of being an _attaché_ of Lady
Adeline's. But as she did not share in this intention, and her
conversation being directed equally to the different persons around,
his attempt was a failure.

It was impossible, at the present moment, but that Lady Adeline's
mind should be taken off from herself; and the bustle of arranging
how the parties should go, together with the constant and varied
homage she received from all present, but particularly from the Duke
of Mercington, which could not fail of being for the time gratifying,
all combined to produce that species of excitement which diffused an
animation and lustre over her features and manners altogether magical.

After much disquisition, it was finally arranged, that the Duke of
Mercington should accompany his sister and Lady Adeline in the same
carriage; and Mr. Foley, with evident mortification, was obliged to
attend another party. Nobody knew better than the duke how to render
himself agreeable when he chose it. There was a bland sunshine on his
countenance, and a kindness in his manner, which was a key to all
hearts; and on the present occasion he felt irresistibly impelled to
endeavour to please. Every word Lady Adeline spoke during the drive,
though her words were not many, and not directed to any subject
on which the stronger qualities of her mind could be called into
exercise, had yet so much originality in them, from that perfect
nature, unobscured by the factitious ways of the world, which makes
even the most trite and common things appear in a new light, that the
duke whispered to his sister, when they arrived at Avington Priory,
"She is perfection. I never met with such grace of mind."

On entering the gay, enchanted scene of the breakfast, all eyes were
directed towards Lady Adeline; and as the duke walked between her and
his sister, the envious whisper ran round, "Who is she? Who invited
her? How very odd she should be here!" but none durst openly find fault
with one whom the Duke of Mercington protected and countenanced. Lord
Gascoigne observed, as they walked in,

"So at last he is caught," to which Lord Baskerville maliciously
replied, "He may be caught--hem! but there are two words to that
bargain--a-hem! For my part, I would rather be the cobbler at the
corner of the street, who knows his stall's his own, than be in
the questionable position of any man, however great. I do not envy
him--hem!"

Mr. Foley continued to take every opportunity of affecting intimacy
with Lady Adeline; addressing her at every moment, asking her opinion
of the _fête_, of the arrangement, of the scene; and then passed
to observations upon the _superior_ beauty of Dunmelraise, and the
happiness of riding with her about that wild scenery: to all of which
she replied naturally, saying,

"They were perfectly different, and admitted of no comparison."

In this manner he endeavoured to create an appearance of greater
intimacy than belonged to common acquaintance; and then requested her,
if disengaged, to dance the first cotillon with him.

To this she agreed. But, in the meantime, the Duke of Mercington,
who had, with one of his _engouements_, selected Lady Adeline as
his favourite of the day, and therefore considered every other
person's approach an intrusion, being annoyed by Mr. Foley's constant
interruption of the conversation, proposed to his sister and Lady
Adeline, and their party, to go on the water. Although the duke could
not without positive rudeness exclude Mr. Foley as they entered the
boat, yet, by taking a seat on one side of Lady Adeline, and placing
his sister on the left, he secured something like a conversation
_suivie_, which he could not otherwise have done.

As they were embarking, the same junto of young men who had made their
remarks on the duke's party when he entered, now stood by the lake;
for the same system observed in Hyde Park, of arranging themselves
in line wherever there were women, in order, as Leslie Winyard said,
_pour se laisser admirer_, was adhered to on the present occasion. "His
grace," said Lord Baskerville, "seems to be really _épris_, and to be
meditating matrimony."

"Who is she?" again questioned Lord Gascoigne. "She must be something
quite new, for I never saw her before."

"Oh! she, you know," replied Lord Baskerville, who always affected to
know every body's story, "she is the girl that Lord Albert D'Esterre
was said to be engaged to, but who broke off the engagement from some
reason or other; probably because she had no intention of marrying a
field-preacher."

"It would have been a confounded pity if she had," growled Lord
Tonnerre. "She is a very beautiful creature. I should not care if I
married her myself."

"How very gallant you are become, Tonnerre," said Lord Boileau. "But,
Baskerville, you forget, in passing sentence on Lord Albert, that he
is become one of _us_, has cast his slough, and come out with a new
skin."

"Yes," replied Lord Gascoigne, "thanks to Lady Hamlet Vernon, he has
found out _que le diable n'est pas si noir_."

"I don't care," said Lord Baskerville, "what he has found out; but I
have found out that he is very disagreeable, and I never wish to have
him in my society--hem!"

"Pardon me," said Lord Gascoigne, "I think you are too severe to-day,
Basky. The man is well enough; mighty polite; makes a good bow; and is
well received by the ladies."

"Upon my word," observed Lord Tonnerre, "the women, now-a-days, are
all gone mad, I think, upon my word. I'd keep those under my care,
at least, in good order. One must have a tight hand upon the best
of them." At that moment, Lady Tenderden and Lady Glenmore arrived,
escorted by Mr. Leslie Winyard and two or three other young men. Every
body crowded round Lady Glenmore to pay her their court; hoped she
admired the _fête_ and the decorations: to all which she replied in the
affirmative with childish gaiety and delight.

"But you have not seen the bower, the beautiful bower," said Lord
Gascoigne; "allow me to conduct you thither."

"Oh! but first come and see my alcove _tout tapissé de jonquilles_;"
and they passed on, Lady Glenmore continuing to lean on Mr. Leslie
Winyard's arm, and tacitly rejecting the offer of Lord Gascoigne, in
that hurry of pleasure which leaves no capability for real enjoyment.

"Well," said Lord Baskerville, looking after Lady Glenmore, "I am of
the same opinion still. There is a sort of rude health and vulgar
jollity about that Lady Glenmore, hem! which she will never get rid of.
I wonder how Leslie Winyard can waste his time in that quarter."

"He does not _waste_ it, I can assure you," said Lord Boileau
significantly. "Remind me, Basky, to tell you a good story, of the
truth of which I myself am a witness. It happened on the night of _la
petite_ Georgina's party. I never looked so foolish in my life. I shall
never forget it."

"But the odd thing is," interrupted Lord Gascoigne, "that Glenmore, who
set out by being the most tenacious husband imaginable, is as quiet as
a mouse about it. How can you account for this, Tonnerre? Do you think
apathy is one of the fruits of marriage?"

"Why do you ask me the question, who have never tried? But this I am
certain of; I would keep my wife in order, if I were married to-morrow.
You had better ask Glenmore himself."

"So I will," said Lord Gascoigne, turning on his heel. "I will go look
for him for the purpose."

"What a cool hand Gascoigne is!" observed Lord Boileau, addressing Lord
Baskerville. "I would give the world to be like him."

"It might suit _you_."

"_Ehew!_" replied the latter, "but it wouldn't me;" and he walked
slowly away to join the Comtesse Leinsengen.

It was by this time pretty late in the afternoon, and the various
persons were beginning to draw together with a view to making up their
dinner _coteries_. Lord Albert and Lord Glenmore had been prevented,
as they anticipated they should, from setting out early by business.
The former had in consequence despatched a note to Lady Hamlet Vernon,
to let her know of his being detained beyond the hour she had named
for going to Avington Priory, but saying he would join her there;
and this had determined her to excuse herself from accompanying Lady
Glenmore's party, with whom she was to have gone; for, well aware of
all the circumstances attendant on Lady Adeline's being present at
the breakfast, she was particularly anxious to appear there herself
accompanied by Lord Albert D'Esterre.

Lady Hamlet Vernon, therefore, ordered her carriage a short time before
the hour named by Lord Albert for his departure; and having driven
slowly towards Avington Priory, she calculated the time so exactly,
that Lord Glenmore and Lord Albert overtook her on the road. They
kissed their hands to her as they passed, and she thought that Lord
Albert looked pleased in the idea that she might have waited for him.
Their carriages entered the gates of the Priory together; and having
alighted, Lady Hamlet Vernon took the offered arms of Lord Albert and
Lord Glenmore, and they proceeded in quest of Lady Glenmore and her
party, making inquiries, as they went, of every one if they had seen
her. Some said she was here, some there; and Lord Gascoigne, who now
approached, observed, that he had seen her last with Lady Tenderden,
Leslie Winyard, Raynham, Frank Ombre, &c. going towards Rosamond's
Bower. "But," continued he, "if one really wants to find any body in a
crowd, the way is, to sit down in one place. My advice, therefore, is
tranquilly to await their repassing; and you will have time enough to
see the lions afterwards." As he concluded this speech, he turned round
to Spencer Newcombe, and whispered in his ear, "I think Winyard owes me
one for this."

"Oh! a hundred, I should say; for

    'Quand on est jeune, et gentillette,
     On ne va pas au bois, fillette,
     On ne va pas au bois pour rien.'"

Lady Hamlet Vernon, however, on this occasion, rather wished to see
than be seen, and deemed it more agreeable to walk about leaning
upon Lord Albert D'Esterre's arm, and therefore replied, "I have not
patience to sit still; let us rather have the amusement of looking for
Lady Glenmore;" and as she spoke, they moved on.

"That affair goes on well," remarked Lord Gascoigne, as his eye
followed Lord Albert and Lady Hamlet Vernon.

"Yes," said Mr. Spencer Newcombe, "she is a clever woman; _elle pique
ses attachés_. I give her credit for having angled so dexterously. A
little while, and D'Esterre will be well landed."

While these persons thus passed their kindly comments, Lord Albert,
Lord Glenmore, and Lady Hamlet Vernon walked about the gardens, and
after a search of some time found Lady Tenderden, Lady Glenmore, and
their party, who were laughing and talking gaily in the alcove _tapissé
de jonquilles_. Mr. Leslie Winyard was playing with one of the long
ribands that pended from Lady Glenmore's hat, and she seemed listening
complacently to his conversation. The moment, however, that she beheld
Lord Glenmore, she darted towards him, her face beaming with pleasure,
and passing her arm through his, and looking up fondly in his face,
said something in a low voice, to which he replied with answering
tenderness; and as she continued to hang upon his arm, expressing her
admiration of the _fête_, he appeared to enter into her delight, and to
be as much amused as herself.

"What perfection of duplicity!" whispered Lord Boileau to Lord
Tonnerre, as they entered the alcove together, and witnessed this
meeting.

"And what a wide swallow _he_ has," replied the other; while Mr. Leslie
Winyard, mortified at the interruption which Lord Glenmore's arrival
had occasioned, but at the same time too much master of his art to
evince his _real_ feeling, endeavoured to show himself satisfied with
the semblance of a secret understanding between himself and Lady
Glenmore as to her conduct towards her husband.

"What perfection of duplicity!" repeated Lord Boileau, as he observed
what passed, and as Mr. Winyard, approaching Lord Glenmore, addressed
him in easy, familiar terms, making himself appear to be, as in all
similar cases, and _selon tous les règles depuis tous les temps,
l'ami de la maison_, and equally necessary to both parties. The whole
scene did not pass unobserved by Lord Albert, who recollected what
observations had been made before, by some of the same party, on Lady
Glenmore at the drawing-room; and he felt he despised those who could
thus lightly tamper with the honour of the man whose notice they
courted, whose society they affected to like, and to whose intimacy
they endeavoured to aspire. But it was a subject on which he could
only think. Miserably, our best friends are frequently precluded, from
circumstances, from being of the least use to us.

After a short interval, passed in visiting the different objects of
beauty and interest in the gardens of the Priory, the hour arrived for
assembling the guests under the marquees where the _déjeûner dinatoire_
was prepared; and Lord and Lady Glenmore, with their party, adjourned
thither. The Leinsengen, Baskerville, Boileau, and Lady De Chere, were
already placed when they arrived; but all made way for them, and in
the _mêlée_ of the moment Mr. Leslie Winyard succeeded in securing his
post by the side of Lady Glenmore. After the first clamour of voices
had subsided, every one spoke to his neighbour only; and Mr. Leslie
Winyard availed himself of this opportunity to engross Lady Glenmore's
attention in every possible way. Lady Boileau, who was seated opposite
and rather _desœuvré_, amused herself by remarking every glance and
every little attention which Mr. Winyard addressed to Lady Glenmore;
and whispered to the Comtesse Leinsengen, "_Ça va grand train_,"
indicating by a look those of whom she spoke.

"O dat is always de way in dis country: either _des dragonnes de
vertu_, or else, _tête baissé_, you give de _grand scandale_. 'Tis
noting new; 'tis _à votre ordinaire. Ça fait pitié_, but it cannot be
help. _Toujours des grandes passions_, which end in de run away, de
food for de newspapers; and den _sauve qui peut_, and de woman is left
to sink or swim, _que vous êtes maladroites, vous autres Angloises_."

"Pardon me, dear comtesse," said Lord Gascoigne, joining in the
conversation, and speaking in the tone of satire with which he
sometimes lashed the foibles of the day, "pardon me, comtesse, not
always: there are many who, a little while after their _écarté_, have
retired from the scene in order to return to it with a fresh title
and fresh fame. It only depends upon the rank that is held by the
_préféré_. It is true, were he as handsome as Adonis, and as seducing
as Love himself, that would be no excuse; but if he has wealth, power,
title, the affair passes through a regular process of _sous entendu_,
and then all is smooth again, _et on passe à des nouvelles amours_."

"Very true," rejoined the Comtesse Leinsengen sharply; "and so much for
your boasted London _morale_."

"Pray, however, remember, comtesse, that London is not England, nor
England London; although, in regard to foreign capitals, that inference
might once have held good, and Paris could be justly said to be all
France. But our system of politics, as well as of private life, is one
which no foreigner ever did or ever will understand."

The Comtesse Leinsengen gave her accustomed shrug, turned away before
Lord Gascoigne had finished speaking, and the whole party soon after
broke up, the ladies retiring into the house to change their dress and
prepare for the ball.

The dancing was already begun when Lady Glenmore's party entered the
ball-room. The whole glitter of the beautiful scene, the perfume
exhaled from the plants, which floated through the freshness of the
country air, all conspired to take the senses captive; and never did
Lady Glenmore look more brilliant, or appear in more joyous spirits.
There was an ingenuousness about her which enchanted even those
who had least of it themselves, and who thought that perfection of
manners consisted only in the refinement of art, to the exclusion of
all natural feeling. As she was led away to the dance by Mr. Leslie
Winyard, Lord Glenmore's eyes followed her, beaming with love and
admiration.

"_Elle est ravissante_," said Lady Tenderden.

Lord Glenmore evinced his assent to the truth of this remark by a
smile, which Lady Tenderden was willing that those around should
consider directed to herself; and she continued to keep Lord Glenmore
in conversation for some time, to improve an opinion, which it was
always her aim to maintain, of her possessing an influence over
him. Nor was the powerful charm of the scene, and the circumstances
attendant upon it, experienced alone by Lady Glenmore. Lady Hamlet
Vernon, in her turn, also acknowledged their influence. The
consciousness of the presence of the object of her love, and the
unalloyed confidence of the continuance of that enjoyment throughout
the evening, gave to her beauty an air of triumph and of joy, which,
had it sprung from an honest, innocent source, instead of being founded
on intrigue and artifice, would have possessed a power and a charm
which, as it was, her beauty missed. As she walked up the ball-room,
leaning on Lord Albert's arm, a crowd intervened between them and the
dancers; for every body had clustered together in one spot, attracted
by some object which was hid from those at a distance.

Lord Albert heard on all sides exclamations of admiration on the beauty
and the grace of some person who was at this moment dancing. Their
curiosity was excited, and they pressed the more eagerly onwards; till,
arriving suddenly at an opening in the circle formed round the dancers,
Lord Albert perceived Lady Adeline Seymour immediately opposite to
him,--the attraction of all eyes, the object of the concentrated
admiration of the whole room. She was dancing with Mr. Foley;--dancing,
not with the affectation of drawling over the floor as though she were
doing penance, but with airiness and elasticity of spirit, tempered by
grace and feminine delicacy. Lady Adeline was not at first conscious
of his presence; while, as he stood rooted to the spot, he had leisure
to gaze upon her in mingled surprise and agitation before she perceived
him: but when she did, her eyes for a moment rested on his, with an
expression which, brief as the moment was, shook his very frame. It was
an agonized look of love and reproach; for not only did she see one
whom she now was forced to believe a rival in his affections leaning
fondly on Lord Albert's arm, but in the bosom of that rival the very
myrtle sprig which Lord Albert had taken from her at the drawing-room
with such seeming devotion. She identified it too well as being the
same; for in her bitterest agony, when she plucked it on the morning
of the Court, she had told over every leaf and every flower; and
connecting each of them with some allusion to past days, and again
feeling it to be the medium of a returning act of fondness, how could
_she_ forget, or mistake it for any other myrtle? As Lady Adeline now
beheld this corroborating evidence of Lord Albert's cruelty and deceit,
the colour glowed and faded in rapid alternation on her cheek; she
seemed lost in thought; her footsteps became unsteady, and ready to
sink under her; and it was a moment or two before Mr. Foley, holding
her hand, could succeed in drawing her attention. She appeared to gaze
at him like one whose senses had fled: then, as if making an effort to
recal them, she stepped forward to continue the dance: but the buoyancy
of her motion was gone; her late gossamer footstep seemed exchanged for
one of lead; her eyes sought the ground; and when it was her turn to go
back to her place, she remained in the middle of the circle till again
rendered conscious of her mistake by the other parties advancing.

In this pause of the dance Lady Adeline had an opportunity of
recovering her presence of mind; and, calling to her aid the just
indignation which Lord Albert's conduct inspired, she felt herself
armed against the tenderer feelings; and by what she construed his
treachery and desertion, she was enabled to steel her heart to every
soft emotion, and not afford greater triumph to her rival, or greater
gratification to his self-love, by betraying any marks of sensibility.
This idea, together with what she owed her mother, whose feelings she
well knew would be deeply wounded if through weakness she made any
public disclosure of her suffering, enabled Lady Adeline to rally her
spirits sufficiently to go through her painful part with apparent ease
and indifference; and so completely did she obtain the mastery over
herself, that perhaps no one, save Lady Hamlet Vernon, was conscious of
the workings of that breast, the peace of which she was perfidiously
destroying. Lord Albert even was a stranger to what she endured; for,
blind to the errors of his own conduct, he of course became blinded
to their consequence, and never attributed Lady Adeline's behaviour
towards him to the natural result of his own in respect to her. It is
ever thus:--we look not to our errors as the cause of the misfortunes
which befall us, and the pains and penalties to which we are doomed.

From the moment Lord Albert first beheld Mr. Foley dancing with Lady
Adeline, he had remained transfixed to the spot. And how can language
render by its slow process the thousand rapid feelings which gush
simultaneously from the heart, and seem to pass through the mind at the
same moment? Jealousy, indignation, scorn (though love in ambush was
concealed beneath these bitter passions), alternately distracted him.
The mother and daughter he alike accused of subtilty and subterfuge.
He recalled to mind Lady Dunmelraise's manner to him; her words
especially, and her expression, on the subject of the breakfast;
Adeline's feigned indifference to it, now contrasted with her actual
presence there, dancing with Mr. Foley. All these circumstances seemed
to confirm the fatal truth; and disappointed love and mortified
vanity, and a sense of having been deceived, juggled, contemned, were
struggling at one and the same moment for ascendancy in his bosom. In
this state of mind, the time, the place, the whole scene, save only
this one prominent feature of interest, were to him as though they
existed not. As the dance drew to a close, he asked himself what line
of conduct he should pursue. Should he speak to Lady Adeline in a
language of reproach? should he give utterance to his feelings in a few
brief words of overwhelming import? No, he would not; it was beneath
him. And if she _was_ unworthy, and had forgotten what was due to him
and to _herself_, _he_ would never forget what was due to _her_. Could
he address Adeline with calm indifference?--impossible!--his heart
would not second the deception.

While he stood thus lost in thought, like one bereft of sense, the
workings of his soul were not unheeded by her who leant on his arm
the while. She felt that this very instant was the critical point of
all her hopes, and she almost unconsciously pressed the arm on which
she rested closer to her breast. Her respiration was broken; her
eyes wandered in quick succession on Lord Albert and Lady Adeline
alternately; and though she dared not propose to move from the spot
where they stood, yet to remain there was torture. At last the dance,
which had appeared to her interminable, ended; and Lady Adeline passed
on with Mr. Foley, without taking any notice of Lord Albert whatever,
as though she saw him not.

Lady Hamlet once more felt that she could breathe again, when she no
longer beheld the object of her fears before her, and without any
mutual recognition of each other having passed between Lord Albert and
Lady Adeline. Fresh hopes revived in her breast. She now ventured to
address the former in a tone of tremulous gentleness.

"Shall we not walk about in the garden? it is very hot here." He
started, looking at her as a man awakening from a dream; and as he
suffered himself to be led whither she would, he continued to muse
in silence on all that had passed: then suddenly murmured, in a
half-broken sentence,

"I _will_ see Adeline; I will see her _to-morrow_." Lady Hamlet knew
too well from this what must be the purpose he was revolving, and the
fervency of his still remaining attachment for Lady Adeline. An icy
chill withered her heart as she thought of the possible result of
that interview, which the words that had involuntarily escaped him
too surely predicted. But deeply skilled in the human heart, she did
not attempt to say any thing to dissuade him at that moment from his
purpose, nor did she venture to make any allusion whatever to Lady
Adeline; for she was well aware that all interference would not only
be fruitless, but might hazard the very object nearest her heart.
Besides, Lord Albert had never suffered himself to pronounce Lady
Adeline's name, even when, in the many conversations which he had held
with Lady Hamlet Vernon, she had been covertly alluded to; neither had
Lady Hamlet Vernon dared openly to touch upon his attachment to Lady
Adeline, since their first interview after the visit at Restormel, when
in the fervency of her feelings, and the plenitude of her despair, she
said,

"Lady Adeline will never make you happy."

From the constrained and painful situation in which she now found
herself placed, when silence was scarcely to be borne, and yet to
break it was perilous, she was relieved by the approach of Mr. Spencer
Newcombe, Lord Raynham, and Lord Glenmore; and glad to arrest them by
way of saying something, asked if they had seen Lady Glenmore.

"Yes," replied Lord Raynham. "I left her some time ago enjoying that
most enviable amusement, which only demands strength of wind and limb,
and spares all the wear and tear of brains that graver cares demand.
I wish it were the fashion for men of my age to make _girouettes_ and
_pirouettes_, and cut _entrès_. Grown gentlemen _are_ taught to dance,
and I have long had serious thoughts of learning _incog._"

"I hope you will let your intimate friends at least enjoy your first
_début_," cried Mr. Spencer Newcombe. "But, after all, you know,
Raynham, that _girouettes_ and _pirouettes_ belong equally to the dance
of life as to the dance of the ball-room; and we are none of us quite
ignorant of these, though some of us make them more gracefully than
others."

Lord Raynham had a way of not hearing when it did not suit him to hear;
and having no impromptu _fait à loisir_ ready at that moment, by way of
reply, he passed on, apparently insensible to the sting, which he was
much better skilled in knowing how to inflict than how to receive.

"I think," said Lord Glenmore, "that at all events Georgina must have
had enough of that enviable amusement, as Raynham calls it, by this
time; and that if we do not go in quest of her, we shall not be
together at supper." So saying, he sought her first among the dancers;
but passed on, inquiring, as he went, if any one had seen her. Some
replied one thing, some another; and many answered in a pointed manner,
which, however, was unobserved by him, for it was contrary to Lord
Glenmore's nature to entertain a doubt of those whom he once loved and
esteemed. Being wearied of seeking Lady Glenmore, and concluding she
had gone to the refreshment-room, he sat down by Lady Tenderden, whose
vanity was always gratified in every opportunity of keeping up the
remembrance of a past juvenile gossip in the eyes of the world.

In the meanwhile, Lady Glenmore, who had been overcome by the heat of
the ball-room, had been easily prevailed upon to seek the refreshing
coolness of the terraces; and having walked about some time, entered
the conservatory, and sat down for a moment to inhale the perfume of
the flowers and plants, and to enjoy the tranquillity it afforded
from the noise and bustle of the dancers. Here Mr. Leslie Winyard
beguiled the hour, and interested Lady Glenmore by reciting various
passages from various poets, analogous to the spirit of the place, and
then passing from these to the theme of such feelings as the lines
he quoted were calculated to inspire. He dwelt with eloquence on the
imperfection and little refinement of all attachments of the present
day, expatiated on that homage which ought to be paid to woman, and
which, as he spoke, he seemed to imply was willingly paid by himself to
her.

There was an inebriating danger in this address, which Lady Glenmore
was too young and too pure to see; and she listened complacently
and unsuspectingly to the perilous flattery, forgetting how the
moments flew, and unconscious of the impropriety of her remaining so
long absent from the general circle, and in a place so remote from
observation. Nor was she aware of the appearance which might attach to
her, till a whisper fell on her ear, and, startling, made her arise
hastily from her seat. It proceeded from Lord Gascoigne and Lord
Baskerville, who stood behind some orange-trees.

"Basky," said the latter, arresting his companion by the arm, "we
are _de trop_ here," directing his attention to the spot where Lady
Glenmore and Mr. Leslie Winyard were.

"Upon my word," replied Lord Baskerville, "this is worth all the _fête_
put together."

"Hush!" said the latter distinctly; "let us be off: it is not fair."

Lady Glenmore looked round, but saw no one: it aroused her, however, to
a recollection of the length of time that she had been sitting there,
and moving forward on the instant, she said,

"We must return to the ball-room."

Mr. Leslie Winyard would willingly have detained her, but he felt that
it was injudicious to press her to remain when she seemed to have taken
alarm; and having himself heard the voices, which he believed to have
occasioned Lady Glenmore's sudden departure, he was conscious that some
curious intruders had witnessed the fact of his _tête-à-tête_; and he
consoled himself for its interruption with the idea that its fame would
soon be spread abroad, and in colours far more glowing than the reality.

When Lady Glenmore returned to the ball-room, she saw her husband in
the midst of Lady Tenderden's _coterie_, enjoying that easy flow of
spirits, which, tempered with elegance and refinement of fancy, marked
peculiarly the charm of his society. As she approached, he arose
and took her hand, and with an expression of pleasure drew her arm
through his, as though he had found all that he wanted to complete
his enjoyment of the pleasure of the scene. Lady Glenmore, too, seemed
delighted; while some of those who witnessed this meeting exchanged
significant looks, and whispered remarks upon the cunning duplicity of
the one, and the consummate _bonhommie_ of the duped.

"It is the best thing," said Lord Baskerville, "that I have seen this
many a day:" and by Lord Tonnerre, Lord Boileau, and the rest of that
knot of persons, Lady Glenmore was pronounced to be the cleverest woman
in the world, her husband the greatest fool, and Leslie Winyard the
most fortunate of men.

All this while Lord Albert had been close at Lady Hamlet Vernon's side,
mute, and apparently insensible to every thing around. Once only did
Lady Adeline pass before him; but he could not be deaf to the lavish
encomiums he heard repeated on all sides, of the beauty and the grace
of her who was to have been his own, but who was now lost to him, he
feared, for ever; and all these things, and the sad contrast of the
past and of the present, aggravated the bitterness of his soul.

The last glimpse he caught of her was on her leaving the Priory, when
she was leaning on the arm of Mr. Foley, accompanied by Lady Louisa
Blithewaite. Her spirits, wound up for some time to a factitious
spring, had given way at last, and she could no longer keep up
the deception. Languid, inanimate, almost unable to stand, she
thought that she had done all which Lady Dunmelraise could demand;
and, under the plea of excessive fatigue, she easily prevailed on
Lady Louisa Blithewaite not to await the end of the _fête_, but to
return to town. The general homage she had received, and the very
particular _dévouement_ of the Duke of Mercington, might, under other
circumstances, have been powerful stimulants to the vanity of any young
mind; but one absorbing passion is the best _natural_ preservative
against the follies of the world, and the heartlessness of vanity; for
the incense of flattery palls upon a heart that is deeply engaged, and
which scorns all praise that is not uttered by the lips of the one
object of its devotion.

Before Lady Adeline reached town, the morning light streaked the
horizon; and she felt that this rising of day, with its accompaniment
of vernal airs, and twittering birds, and sparkling dew-drops, and
all the gladness of an awakened creation, were but a mocking contrast
to the setting sun of her hopes, the mournful notes of sorrow which
rung in her ears, and the deadness of that affection which she had
once thought could suffer no diminution or decay. The chilling damp
of disappointed love clung around her heart and withered every hope,
rendering her wholly spiritless, and unable to converse; and when she
arrived at Lady Dunmelraise's door, she took a hasty leave of Lady
Louisa Blithewaite, and stealing as noiselessly as she could to her
apartment, she courted the silence of reflection, but not the calm of
sleep.




CHAPTER IX.

LOVERS' ERRORS.


Had Lord Albert D'Esterre been himself at the time, and not the victim
of contending passions, he would have left the _fête_ at Avington
Priory the moment he had seen Lady Adeline depart. As it was, he
remained; it cannot be supposed from any entertainment or delight that
he derived from the scene, but from that species of suffering which
renders _all_ scenes alike; and in the bitterness of his heart he even
affected a gaiety such as the poor maniac feels,

    "With moody madness laughing wild
     Amid severest woe."

How many hearts are there in similar situations, whose gangrene wounds
are festering at the core while the mask of pleasure is painted on the
face! But there are few persons in the world who know us sufficiently,
or think of us enough, to detect the assumed disguise; and thus the
wretched are numbered with the happy. Some few, however, there are,
who, mingling in this cheating crowd, have yet their hopes and hearts
anchored in a far different sphere, and pass through the infected mass,
themselves unspotted, like Milton's personification of Purity amid the
crew of Comus.

These, with deep commiseration of spirit, penetrate the paint and
varnish of deceptive pleasure, and, shuddering, see what waste they
make of life who never look beyond it--losing, for its shadow, the sum
and substance of true happiness. But _such as these_ were not to be
found in the circle in which Lord Albert moved. He had often, since
his _entrainement_ in that delusive scheme of existence in which he
was involved, exclaimed, "I was not made for this!" The nobler, truer
purposes of existence were still the inmates of his breast, but they
were under a spell which he had no power to break: they were dead
letter, and were in peril of becoming obsolete.

In this state of moral danger, had he confided to Lord Glenmore's ear
the contradictory feelings by which he was alternately swayed, in
him Lord Albert would have found a true friend; for he was not one
of the many who pass by exultingly, in the ride, or indifference, or
selfishness of their nature, and say, "You, too, are happy," careless
of the reality, so long as the sunshine of their own amusement is not
darkened by the sorrow they see another wear. No: Lord Glenmore would
have not only commiserated, but counselled; not only counselled, but
aided. Alas! we may suspect, that when we shrink from confiding our
sorrows to a friend whom we know to be good and true, we are ourselves
under some fatal delusion.

Lord Albert sought not to unbosom himself to Lord Glenmore, from a
latent feeling that he was himself in error; and he had not had,
for many a day, the courage, or rather the virtue, to probe his own
conduct, but suffered the blindness of self-deception to gather like
a cataract over his mental vision; he acted under the consciousness
that he was to blame, yet without sufficient energy to attempt to
dispel the film, and look on things as they really were. It may seem
matter of surprise that Lord Glenmore, who lacked not penetration, had
not openly spoken to his friend on the subject of his engagement with
Lady Adeline: but while Lord Glenmore was happy himself, in that deep
sense of the word in which it most imports us to be happy, the mazes
of entanglement which gather around those who swerve from the path of
rectitude entered not into his imagination. He had always pursued a
straight-forward path, and truth and sincerity had given him a clue to
pass through life without entering on any of those tortuous ways, such
as now distracted his unhappy friend.

This clear moral light of action rendered him, in the present instance,
blind to the conduct of Lord Albert; and though the rumour was
prevalent amongst the circle in which they lived, that his engagement
with Lady Adeline was at an end, yet it had not reached Lord Glenmore's
ear; and even had it done so, perhaps, from ignorance of Lady Adeline's
merits, he might have thought that his friend's affections would be
better bestowed elsewhere; but, at all events, he would have felt, that
to mention the subject, while Lord Albert had made no allusion to it
himself, would have been an indelicacy on his part.

Thus was the former, from his own want of confidence, deprived of the
only counsellor who might, by a word, have dispelled the mist of error
which surrounded him; and by assisting Lord Albert to recover his
self-esteem, have restored him to a happiness which was now eluding his
grasp, if it had not already done so. Experience, however, must be
bought. There is an ordeal to be passed through by every one. Happy are
those who are purified seven times in the fire, and come forth humbled
and ameliorated!

However much Lord Albert's sufferings might have been unnoticed by the
general eye, there was one who read his soul's secret but too plainly.
Lady Hamlet Vernon saw through the veil of the false gaiety and forced
spirits which he assumed; and again and again felt, with an impassioned
woman's feelings, that the hour was come which was to decide her fate.

On the night, or rather morning, when the festivities of Avington
Park were ended--when the last lingering footsteps of the votaries
of pleasure passed away, satiated but not satisfied with the very
continuance of that diversion which for ever demands fresh food to feed
its sickly appetite, although it palls upon the aliment it craves--Lord
Albert could no longer drown his senses in the hum and glitter of the
gay crowd; and having handed Lady Hamlet Vernon to her carriage, sought
his own. And there once more alone, with a perfect abstraction of mind
he threw himself back, and, covering his face with his hands, shuddered
at the broad blue light of day, which seemed, in its pure serenity, to
mock the dark turbulence of his stormy thoughts; but he could not shut
out the beam of conscience, before whose searching ray the light and
darkness are both alike.

His pillow brought no repose, and he felt glad when the hour came
which called him to attend the routine of his official situation.
Distasteful as the occupation was become, harassed and preoccupied as
were his thoughts, he went through the duties it imposed with his usual
precision and power; and found, what every one will find, that duties,
however dry, when they are strictly fulfilled bring a palliative
to suffering, and act as correctives of evil. It must be allowed,
however, that it is a great prerogative which men enjoy over women, in
experiencing, from the very nature of the employments which generally
devolve on them, a relief that strengthens and invigorates, while those
of women bear them invariably back to the very source and centre of
their sorrows, and awaken all the enfeebling tenderness of the heart.
But neither should this create a spirit of repining. Doubtless, every
one who seeks for strength where alone it can be found will not seek
in vain; and the feeble may become strong when they place their trust
aright.

Lord Albert D'Esterre, having finished the business of the day, was
enabled with more calmness to meet the pain which he expected would
attend his visit in South Audley-street, whither he went to seek an
explanation from Lady Dunmelraise and Lady Adeline. As he crossed
Piccadilly from St. James's, with the intention of avoiding the throng
of Hyde Park, and as he was turning into a street leading more directly
to the point whither he was going, Lady Hamlet Vernon's carriage passed
him. She looked out of the window, at the same time kissing her hand
as though she wished him to stop; but returning her salute, he passed
on. Still there was something peculiar in her expression which did not
escape his observation. It spoke a triumph, of which, had he known the
cause, it would have proved an antidote to the misery that was in store
for him; for in that case he would, under every circumstance, have
persevered in his determination of obtaining an explanation from Lady
Adeline in person.

When arrived at the well-known door of Lady Dunmelraise, he waited with
impatience for its opening, but no one came. He desired his servant to
knock again; and looking up, he perceived the windows were open, and
maid-servants passing to and fro in the rooms with an air of unusual
bustle, which made him shudder, although he knew not why. At the
same moment, the porter opened the door, and informed him that Lady
Dunmelraise and Lady Adeline had left town a few hours before. He was
for a minute mute with astonishment.--"Left town!" he exclaimed; "for
how long?"

"I really do not know, my lord."

"When do you expect their return?"

"Not this year," was the reply: "at least, we have received no orders
to lead us to suppose my lady is coming back; but, on the contrary, we
have directions to take down the furniture."

"This is unaccountable!" ejaculated Lord Albert, with a movement of
mingled indignation and grief. "Where is Lady Dunmelraise gone?" he
asked, after another pause.

"To Dunmelraise, I believe, my lord."

Lord Albert continued to sit on his horse mechanically for some
minutes, as if wholly unable to collect his thoughts, or to believe
the truth of what the servant said. Again and again he asked the
same questions, and invariably received the same answers, till there
was no longer any doubt of the fact; and then in broken sentences
he said, unconscious that he spoke aloud,--"It is too true, too
evident--unnecessary!--unworthy!"

"My lord?" said his groom, thinking he addressed him.

"Nothing, James, nothing," he said, starting from his reverie; and
suffering his horse to choose its own direction, he allowed the reins
to lie heedlessly on its neck; and then, again, actuated by a change of
impulse, he urged it to its speed, dashing rapidly through the streets;
when some of his acquaintance, who saw him as he passed, observed,
"D'Esterre is certainly quite mad; I always thought so." And thus he
continued his way homeward, now riding furiously, now creeping along,
as the wayward mood of the moment directed, till he found himself at
his own door; and then, flinging himself from his horse, he rushed to
his apartment, forbidding all interruption. Lord Albert's servants,
who were exceedingly attached to him, looked aghast at his altered
demeanour, and marvelled what had befallen their master.

No sooner was he alone, than he paced the room in all directions,
uttering broken sentences of, "Gone--gone--not to return!--without
one word of farewell!"--Then he cast himself first into one chair,
then into another; then arose abruptly, and striking his forehead,
cried, "It is so. The die is cast, and all is over. But I will write
to Lady Dunmelraise.--No; rather I will go myself to her. I will
upbraid her duplicity, and shame Adeline for this unworthy conduct."
Then again, sinking into a calmer mood, but one of deeper anguish,
he said, "It is too plain, it is too evident. Why should I seek
that which I know already? No, no," he added, with a bitter smile,
"Adeline shall not have it in her power to say that I was the first
to break our engagement. Lady Dunmelraise shall not avail herself
of any precipitation on my part, to dissolve a tie which she wishes
broken, but knows not how to break. Adeline shall herself give me my
dismissal; for _it is_ Adeline who has coldly, cruelly, and shamelessly
cast me off." Here he felt a check. There was a sort of echo that gave
back the sentence in mockery to his ear. "Adeline has cast _me_ off,"
seemed repeated in bitter derision. There are words and circumstances
which occur in the life of every one, when something more than the
usual meaning of the one, or the common import of the other, appears
to attach a consequence to them beyond their own individual value. So
strongly did this feeling come over Lord Albert at the present moment,
as he referred all blame to Lady Adeline, that a sudden revulsion
of sensation rendered his mind a chaos. Still his unwillingness to
acknowledge himself in fault made him recall every trivial occurrence
which could confirm his jealous doubts, and dwell on these till he
again persuaded himself that he was the innocent and aggrieved person.

Mastered by this false impression, he determined to remain silent, and
await his expected dismissal. "Then," he said, "then will be the time
for me to speak of my wrongs." His mind was turbulent and gloomy all
that day; but when the evening came, he habitually sought the circle
in which he had been too much accustomed of late to pass his time, and
which had become necessary to him. As Lady Tilney had a _soirée_, he
drove to her house; and in this routine of what is termed pleasure he
courted and found that torpor of reflection which it is its peculiar
and baneful property to produce.

Lady Hamlet Vernon, who had heard from Mr. Foley of Lady Dunmelraise's
sudden departure, and who felt like one snatched from the perilous
brink of an abyss on receiving the intelligence, was now once more
enabled to put forth all her fascinations; and on that evening devoted
herself, with successful ardour, to the task of engaging Lord Albert's
attention, and diverting his mind from painful retrospection. With all
a woman's wiles, she suited her discourse to his taste; and, without
too much or too little display, brought her varied talents into view,
not as though they were her _own_, but merely the reflection caught
from Lord Albert's; existing but _through_ him and _for_ him; by him
to be fostered and improved, or by him to be crushed and dissolved, at
pleasure.

Who but a woman can enter into this refinement of enchantment? Who
but a woman can glory in being a slave? The effect Lady Hamlet Vernon
produced on Lord Albert this evening was that of a lulling spell; an
influence which she always possessed in greater degree, in proportion
to the racking doubts and anxieties under which he laboured, and which
rendered him the easier prey to her seducing arts. When he parted from
her, accordingly, on that evening, he felt grateful for the solace
which her friendship and devotion seemed invariably to afford. False
and unstable as was its basis, he leant on it with mistaken confidence;
for he had plunged into the deceptive sea of error, and was doomed
to be the sport of every incidental circumstance that floated on the
surface of his affections.

On the following morning, his cruel, unjust opinions of Lady
Dunmelraise and her daughter were confirmed, upon reading in the
newspapers an announcement of Lady Dunmelraise's having left town,
accompanied by a remark, in the usual language of similar information,
that it was understood the lovely Lady Adeline was soon to be led to
the hymeneal altar by Mr. George Foley. He cast down the paper with a
feeling of sickness at his heart, which again gave way to a sense of
deep injury; and then once more was renewed the determination to clear
up the question by a direct application to Lady Dunmelraise: but the
false pride of wounded feelings, offended honour, indignation at being
deceived, and all the minor concomitants of self-love, brought back
the tide of error which swept his thoughts into another channel, and
with the sullen gloom of despair he finally said, "No; the issue of
this strife must soon come of itself: let it come: it shall neither be
retarded nor hastened by me."

While Lord Albert was thus suffering the penalty of his own mistaken,
erring conduct, Lady Adeline's sufferings had not been less painfully
acute; with this only difference, that self-reproach had never torn
her breast; and agonizing as were her feelings on the morning when
she returned from Avington Priory, they were enviable in comparison
with those which racked his heart. Lady Dunmelraise had given orders,
the previous evening, that her daughter should not be disturbed on
the following day; concluding that the fatigue of the _fête_ would be
to her doubly trying, and that she would require a long and complete
rest. She was much surprised, therefore, when she came to breakfast, to
find Lady Adeline awaiting her. Her countenance and air at once told
a melancholy truth to Lady Dunmelraise; and she felt not only that
rest had been a stranger to her, but that some more decided event, and
more painful than any which had yet befallen her, must have occurred,
to have, in so brief a space, effected such ravages on her youth and
bloom. Nor did she remain long in ignorance of this so sudden change;
for Lady Adeline, meeting her mother's embrace, with many convulsive
sobs breathed out her entreaty to be taken immediately from London,
and to be spared her being called upon to witness any more of those
agonizing scenes, such as she had been exposed to at Avington Priory.

"I have done enough, I have done enough, dearest mamma," she exclaimed,
"to show Albert an indifference which I never can really feel towards
him; and you will not, I am sure, condemn your poor child to any more
similar trials." She then detailed to Lady Dunmelraise the particulars
of the last night's occurrences, who saw too plainly, and shuddered as
she saw, that this strife of suppressed feeling had shaken the frame of
her child, and not only blighted her happiness, but endangered her very
existence.

"My sweet Adeline," said Lady Dunmelraise with the tenderest
earnestness, "would that I could as easily take all sorrow from you as
I can now comply with this your request! You shall no longer endure a
protracted stay here: we will leave town directly."

Lady Adeline knew her mother's heart, and doubted not of her
acquiescence in her wishes; but there was a manner of feeling _with_
her at the moment, which was grateful to her wounded heart beyond the
mere act of compliance; and as she wept on her mother's shoulder, she
said,

"I am an unthankful being to feel unhappy when I have such a parent."
Lady Dunmelraise kissed away her tears; and having done all in her
power to soothe, left her with the secret intention to arrange their
immediate departure. Scarcely was Lady Adeline alone, than she looked
fearfully around, as though the very precincts of the room upbraided
her for going away, and as though she had voluntarily sought to take a
step which was for ever to part her from Lord Albert.

An icy coldness clung round her heart, as she gazed again and again at
the walls of the apartment, and in every article of their decoration
recognized some trace of him she loved. She murmured inwardly, "Even
where his shadow fell, the senseless wall recalls all my grief; for
though it left no trace upon the spot on which it passed, what can
efface the reflection of his image from my heart?

"Can it be," she went on to say, "that so short a time ago I entered
this house, elated with hope and delight at the idea of meeting him?
can it be that he should have appeared inspired with the same feelings
as myself, and then, without any reason, so cruelly, so heartlessly
desert me? I think I could have better borne this sorrow, had he only
confided in me as a friend. Yes, had he but told me the truth, I might
have mourned in secret; but I never should have wept for him as I do
now in bitterness of heart, to think that I have so loved an object
unworthy of my esteem."

Alas! when we are in sorrow, we fancy any other grief would be easier
endured than that which weighs us down; but we judge erroneously.
Sorrows spring not out of the ground; and it is knowing how to
suffer the scourge under which we smart that can alone bring us any
alleviation. There are few persons, so young as Lady Adeline, with
feelings as finely strung, who are so well prepared to meet with trial;
yet still poor human nature is in its best estate a mart for sorrows;
and those are happiest who soonest learn to barter the bright, delusive
hopes of youth for the sober, subdued views of real life, which,
without producing a distaste for this world's enjoyments, despoil them
of that vivid colouring which cannot last, and detaches them from
considering it as their abiding place.

Such was the lesson now taught to Lady Adeline, as she was called, with
unexpected haste, to quit South Audley-street; and she cast a last
hurried glance at the chair where he had sat, who was still her heart's
idol, at the carpet on which he had trod, the book he had opened, and,
lastly, the picture, the image dearer than all except himself, which
she now left for the first and last time, as no longer worthy to be her
companion. Notwithstanding the abruptness with which she was snatched
from these melancholy contemplations, and the revulsion of feelings
which her sudden farewell to these cherished objects occasioned,
Lady Adeline, after a few hours' reflection, acknowledged that the
promptness of Lady Dunmelraise's decision had been made in kindness,
and that the blow which was to sever her from him she most loved, if it
were inevitable, were best to fall suddenly.




CHAPTER X.

AN AWKWARD DILEMMA.


The _fête_ at Avington Priory afforded a theme of conversation, if
such a term is not inapplicable to such a subject, of much longer
duration than was usual; for in the existence of those who were actors
in the scene, or participators in its pleasures, one folly generally
succeeded another so quickly as to chase away all remembrance of its
immediate predecessor. Perhaps, too, in this instance, more interest
was experienced in the discussion of the entertainment, from the zest
which some signal _esclandres_ gave to it, and which were generally
whispered about; particularly that in which Lady Glenmore's and Mr.
Leslie Winyard's names were involved.

Of this report, Lord Baskerville and Lord Gascoigne were the active
propagators; and which, corroborated by the condemning facts they
themselves had witnessed, led those who listened to the conclusion
that the matter was _une affaire decidée_. The only question then was,
whether it was well or ill arranged; for in all things the creed of
these parties taught them to estimate the _manner_ of an action without
any reference to its morality. Opinions were given respecting the good
or bad taste of the thing; and speculation ran high how Glenmore would
take it. However far from the truth, or unjust, these conclusions and
opinions might in reality be, it cannot be denied that Lady Glenmore
had in some measure afforded subject of conversation to the licentious
and censorious tongues of these traducers, by permitting the very
marked and exclusive attentions of Mr. Leslie Winyard in society; and,
in doing so, justified an apprehension which the most candid and the
most kind observer (if any such had been there as witness) could not
but feel, that she must inevitably fall a victim to a man of Leslie
Winyard's character, unless some powerful hand snatched her from the
peril.

In the example of Lady Glenmore's present danger, the mischiefs arising
out of the system of the society in which she lived are painfully
apparent; and although they have more than once been dwelt upon, yet,
with the object of unmasking a disguised evil, they cannot be too
frequently alluded to or minutely detailed. Nor can the observation
be too often repeated, that such dangers must unavoidably accrue to
the young and inexperienced while receiving none of those salutary
checks which are afforded them in a society differently organized, and
where the ties of families, and the counsel and protection of sincere
friends, are _not_ sacrificed to the laws and rules of exclusive
fashion.

Lady Glenmore's absence, it might almost be called alienation, from
Lord and Lady Melcombe and the bosom of her own family, had been so
gradual as scarcely to be perceptible. Had it been otherwise, she
would have recoiled from the idea, and her excellent heart would have
sufficed to guard her from so unnatural a fault; but the evil grew out
of the circumstances in which she was placed, and increased without any
appearance which could awaken a suspicion of its real tendency. She did
not go to-day to Lady Melcombe, because Lady Tenderden, or Lady Tilney,
or some other of her friends, had prevented her at the very moment she
was stepping into her carriage; but she would go to-morrow: and when
to-morrow came, fatigued with the ball or the assembly of the preceding
evening, she did not rise till at so late an hour, that Lady Melcombe
would be out, and it was in vain for her to go. When the evening in
its turn came round, then some ceremonious diplomatic dinner, followed
by the _soirées_ of the different members of her _coterie_, equally
precluded her from fulfilling this duty.

Thus one day passed on after another, and the rare and short visit to
her parents, when it was paid, afforded no real communion of heart
or thought. Yet all this happened not wilfully, not in positive
indifference, or forgetfulness of natural affection, but arose, as it
were, unavoidably, out of the life she led. Let it not excite surprise
that this alienation had been productive of no alarm in the tender and
affectionate hearts of Lord and Lady Melcombe. They, indeed, saw less
of their daughter than they wished; but though they sometimes sighed
over the "angel visits, few and far between," of their estranged child,
still, in the indulgent fondness of their hearts, perhaps too in a
mistaken pride, they found an excuse for her constantly living in a
round of dissipation, partly from the pomp and circumstance attendant
on the public situation which her husband held, and partly from
thinking it natural that one so young, and gifted with external graces,
should indulge in the pleasures that courted her on all sides.

Another cause, too, existed, to render their separation an apparent
consequence of her marriage. Lord and Lady Melcombe had not lived at
any time on terms of intimacy with that circle which now exclusively
formed their daughter's and Lord Glenmore's society; and a further
barrier by this means stood between their meeting; but it was one
which, if natural feelings had been allowed their proper influence,
and had any advance been made to Lord and Lady Melcombe, on the part
of those persons, towards their acquaintance, might easily have been
removed.

In this case, for their daughter's sake, they would readily have met
any advance, and in order to do so, have stepped out of their own
habitual line of society; a society founded on the dignified principles
of high rank, and the rational grounds of real social happiness: but
they were the last persons to court an intimacy where a mutual desire
was not expressed for its formation; and the question, however painful
as it affected their natural intercourse with their child, was not,
however, one which gave rise to any seriously uneasy feelings. When
they did see her, they saw her so fondly attached to her husband, and
so happy, what could they fear for her? It would almost have seemed
like a selfish apprehension, to have indulged any doubts regarding her
future welfare.

Their own course through life had been one perpetual gleam of
sunshine, a circumstance which is apt to render us more blind to
the possibility of evil, than when we have been exercised in the
school of adversity; that school by which we are alone perfected, and
without whose salutary discipline the false security is indulged, that
"_to-morrow will be as to-day, and even more abundant_," and we dread
no check to our earthly career.

How fearful is this species of happiness, which, resting on itself,
forgets the hand by which it is alone upheld! Could Lord and Lady
Melcombe have seen through this delusion--could they have guessed that
their child stood at the moral point where the two paths separate
which lead to virtue or to vice, and where the traveller in the road
of life, according as he makes his choice, will be admitted in the
end to misery or happiness--they would have performed their duty as
parents unhesitatingly; they would have pointed out to their child the
excellence of the one course, and have warned her of the inevitable
ruin and degradation attendant on the other. As to the current reports
of the day, they were the last to hear them, as is usually the case
with those most concerned; and in this respect Lord Glenmore was
removed still further from a knowledge of the truth. Lady Glenmore,
deprived of her natural and true guides, surrounded by persons whose
lives were, generally speaking, characterized by the same errors,
on the brink of which she now hung, and who, if they looked on such
conduct as error, held it in a very venial light even when detected,
and as nothing, if it evaded open discovery, had little chance of
receiving any counsel in time to save her.

Speaking thus of Lady Glenmore, it must not be supposed that she viewed
her own conduct and career in its true light, or that she erred from
any determination to err, or even from being led away by any impulse of
passion; far from it. The innocence of her nature, her domestic habits
and education, as well as her attachment to her husband, had in the
first instance rendered her present mode of life distasteful. But it
is the very property of the subtle poison of that atmosphere in which
she lived and breathed to pollute the healthful springs of being, till
the moral taste becomes less and less acute, and is at length wholly
corrupted, leaving the mind totally unable to discriminate between
right and wrong.

Although, with the young men who lived in the same society, the event
of the downfall of her reputation was looked upon as a thing of
course, and hailed, in their licentiousness of spirit, as a matter of
congratulation, since it would level another victim to their standard,
still there were others of the _coterie_, who, from motives of policy,
were anxious that no further _esclandre_ should take place, than
that which had already arisen on the subject, to call forth the loud
reprehension of a public whom they at once feared and despised, and
whose opinions, though they set them at defiance, they in reality
wished not to brave unnecessarily: for in the instance of Lady
Glenmore, the destruction of so much happiness as was supposed to have
centred in her union would be likely to create proportionate abhorrence
and condemnation of a system of society which had been the occasion of
it, and lead to a sifting and exposure of the principle and motives on
which that system was based.

Lady Tilney was the first person whose acuteness and vigilance descried
the danger; and was impelled to attempt an arrangement of the business,
as well from her general love of managing every body and every thing,
as from the more weighty reason attached to it. Being perfectly aware
of Lady Glenmore's character, she dreaded lest an affair which, in
the hands of a woman of tact, might have been managed without any
_éclat_, would with her be precipitated to a point which must end in
an exposure. She felt, however, that to speak to Lady Glenmore openly
would be to commit herself with a person whose want of discretion was
the chief ground of her apprehensions respecting her; and therefore,
after much reflection, she determined to seek the assistance of Lady
Tenderden in the business, and employ her in its management, as being
more intimate with the parties than she herself was.

It was not the first time that Lady Tilney had availed herself of an
intermediate hand to work out a favourite undertaking. With this view,
some ten days after the _fête_ at Avington Priory, and when the whole
affair was openly spoken of throughout their circle, Lady Tilney sought
an opportunity of communicating her views to Lady Tenderden; and having
denied herself to every one else, they were soon in deep conference in
the _boudoir_.

"Dear Lady Tenderden," said the former, addressing her, "I am sure that
I may speak to you in confidence on a subject in which you will feel
an equal if not greater interest than myself: I allude to our _élève_,
_la petite_ Georgina. This is a very silly affair of hers with Leslie
Winyard, and is going too far: don't you think so?" Lady Tenderden
gave no direct answer.

"Surely you must allow that she is not the _sort_ of person to risk any
hazards, or to manage this kind of affair well or with prudence. If
allowed to go on by herself, she will run headlong down the precipice,
and no earthly power can save her. Besides, it would be such a terrible
thing _for us_, if there was any public scandal to ensue. Consider, my
dear Lady Tenderden, we should all incur some portion of blame, and
_she_ would be pitied; while we should have all those persons whom we
have banished without the pale of our society raving against _us_, and
our system, as though it were a _lazaretto_ in which all the plagues of
Egypt were assembled. Now, though _we_ know how false this is, still we
ought to provide against it."

Lady Tenderden nodded assent as Lady Tilney went on:--"_You_ agree with
me, I am sure; for the curious and the disappointed will not judge
_coolly_, and we must try to shelter ourselves from their imputations,
however groundless. We ought to move on in a sphere out of the general
nature of things; but, in order to do this _impunément_, it is
necessary to be vigilant and prudent; and I assure you I am never off
the watch."

"_Peut-être_; but den _how_ would you do in this instance?"

"Ah! there lies the delicacy; in that _how_ consists the difficulty
of the business; for you know, as to _la petite personne_ herself, we
cannot with any safety _compromettez_ ourselves by speaking to her on
this subject. She is one of those innocent persons who would, I am
sure, either start off at the bare mention of any _liaison_, and would
make a great fuss, and a scene which might be very unpleasant to us
all in a thousand ways; or else she might give _tête baissé_ into the
thing, so much the more from being warned against it, as your meek
people always do; and, though not discreet, she has cunning enough
to keep it strictly secret till the moment when she steps into the
carriage which is to take her from her disconsolate husband."

"_Peut-être_," was again Lady Tenderden's brief reply.

Lady Tilney proceeded. "Now, I think there is one, and only one, way in
which it can be managed; and your assistance will be vitally important
for its success."

"Oh _de graces_! do not involve me in any of dese troublesome _rôles_:
I am not at all de _personne_ to play dem well; and _l'inconduite de la
petite en question_ makes me quite _frissonné_ to think of any thing
of the kind."

"Oh! but, my dear Lady Tenderden, for Glenmore's sake, you know, for
all our sakes, you will not let this affair terminate as it must do if
something is not done to put it on a right footing? You will not surely
let the _scandale_ of such a common-place _dénouement_ attach to our
society, as the infallible issue of the affair must cause, unless we
attempt to save appearances, and settle the _marche du jeu_ in _better
taste_ at least?"

Lady Tenderden's countenance relaxed, as if she was pleased at the
idea of holding an influence over Lord Glenmore; and Lady Tilney was
satisfied that she had done wisely in condescending to flatter her
_amour-propre_, by confessing herself secondary in influence; a point
which she was never very willing to yield: but she felt it was the
surest way of securing Lady Tenderden's co-operation, and proceeded to
say,

"Now listen, I entreat you, to what I have to propose; and if you do
not approve my idea, then suggest something better. The only thing
that remains to be done, in my opinion, then," continued Lady Tilney,
"is to get Georgina out of England. You know Glenmore cannot move; but
that is no reason why _she_ may not be absent for a few months. The
advantage of your company, her health, a thousand excuses may be found:
and if she is not as deeply involved as we suspect with Winyard, _this_
will break off the affair; while, if she is, absence, and distance, and
the chances of time and place, _que sais-je enfin_----a million things
may turn away the tide of observation from _us_: at all events, the
_éclat_ will be less offensive abroad than at home. Now, could you not
propose to her a little tour to Spa, or _Les Eaux de Barèges_, when the
season comes round for leaving London?"

Lady Tenderden seemed half inclined to acquiesce, but, like most people
who make sudden changes of opinion, she did not know exactly how to
give as ready an assent as she was willing in her heart to do; while,
at the same time, there was a little demur at the idea of being made
the tool of Lady Tilney, as well as of being mixed up in an affair in
which, if it ended wrong, she would regret to have been implicated.

Lady Tilney's flattery and persuasive reasonings, however, as was
generally the case when she had a favourite point to carry, prevailed;
and the conversation ended with an arrangement, that Lady Tenderden
should, in the course of a few days, open the subject to Lady
Glenmore, and put it _en train_.

Although the solicitude of the polite Lady Tilney for the fate of her
young _élève_ might have been premature as to the precise degree of her
_liaison_ with Mr. Leslie Winyard, still, if it had been entertained
on a better principle than that of mere expediency, it would have
been amiable and justifiable; for when a married woman's name is once
connected with that of any man in particular, there is an immediate
taint on her character, which, while it is degrading to herself,
attaches to her husband the character of dupe, or something worse, and
affords an example to others, productive of almost as much evil as
would accrue from actual guilt.

There are very few women on whom this stain is cast, who could, like
the youthful Lady Glenmore, plead perfect innocence of intention; but
she had been, almost at the outset of her marriage, thrown alone in
the midst of the most dangerous class of the most dangerous society
of London. She had not certainly to complain that Lord Glenmore had
wilfully deserted or neglected her: his absence was a necessary
consequence of the duties he had taken upon himself in his public
career.

While, however, she acknowledged this, she could not but feel and mourn
over his absence with childish simplicity of tenderness: and when at
last, partly from necessity, and partly from the various arts used
to wean her from this innocent love, she felt, as it was natural she
should feel, considering that no very strong principle of religion had
been instilled into her mind, or given stability to her character, that
there could be no impropriety in having recourse to the pleasures and
pursuits of fashion--pleasures which pertained to her situation, and
were not only sanctioned, but encouraged, by her husband--still, in
doing this, it was not in her nature to aspire to any leading part, or
to take any particular station, in the circle in which she moved. Had
it been so,--had she been, in short, more worldly,--her conduct would
have been more measured, more under the control of appearances; and
though she would not have had so much real virtue, she would better
have known how to preserve its semblance. But as it was, the object
sought by her in the maze of pleasure was simply an indemnification
for her husband's absence: and not possessing a mind stored by solid
instruction, or gifted with strong judgment, amiable, pliant, and fond,
she entered on this perilous career without one of those qualities
which might have enabled her to steer her course with safety.

Thus exposed, she risked becoming the victim of any designing persons
who found it their amusement or their interest to render her the
subject of licentious animadversion. Where almost every event, as in
the kind of life described, bears some analogy, little variety occurs
to mark the progress of time. One intrigue resembles another; one
slander is like its neighbour; one _soirée_ is a specimen of all: and
unless, indeed, some defiance of morality more glaring than usual, some
solecism in a marriage or a ball, a death or a breakfast, take place,
there is little for the chronicler of the system to register in his
page.

Ministers had looked forward to rest after the burthen of the session;
the nobles had gone to their country seats to enjoy the beauties of the
"sere and yellow leaf," there to renew the dissipations of the town.
Hither, too, the invited _intrigant_ had followed the object of his
present pursuit, to tell in shady bowers the tale, so often told before
to others, of treacherous love; while the sportsman, with more open
and more honest if not nobler aim, hied him to moors and highlands in
pursuit of his ruling passion.

If, during the last moments of the waning season, nothing of stronger
character had occurred, on Lady Glenmore's and Mr. Leslie Winyard's
part, to attract the particular notice of the circle in which their
_liaison_ was matter of conversation, still there was no relaxation
of _his_ attentions, or of _her_ apparent preference, to justify the
belief that he had relinquished his pursuit, or that she had discarded
him.

Lady Tilney, therefore, continually urged Lady Tenderden to the
necessity of adopting the measures she had proposed; and the latter,
having satisfied herself that no unpleasant responsibility was likely
to attach to her, consented to fill her allotted part in the measure,
and propose to Lady Glenmore to accompany her on a tour.

"What do you do with yourself this summer?" said Lady Tenderden to the
latter, as she was sitting _tête-à-tête_ with her one morning.

"Indeed I do not in the least know what are Glenmore's plans; but I
should hope we shall go to the country somewhere, for I begin to feel
that my health suffers from the racket of a town life. But whatever
_he_ chooses I shall like best, for nothing would do me any good if he
were not to be of the party."

"_Oh! quelle enfantillage!_ Well! I hoped you had chased away that bad
habit of being always in de leading-string. What! _you_ a minister's
wife, and suppose that he is to follow you up _stair_ and down _stair
en nourrisson_ all your life! My dear, how would de state be taken care
of after this fashion?"

"True," said Lady Glenmore, sighing, "and I am now used to be alone."
In fact Lady Tenderden knew that these words were uttered more from
habit than from feeling them in the painful degree in which they would
once have been spoken; and she replied,

"Well then, my dear ladi, _il faut prendre son partie_; and since it
is impossible you should have him always _à vos trousses_, what think
you of making a little excursion with me to _Les Eaux de Barèges_, or
to Spa, for two or three months in the _belle saison_? This would, I
should think, exactly suit you: it will refresh your beauty, refit your
_toilette, et vous reviendrez entièrement renouvellée. On se ressent
de la fumée de Londres._ It is quite necessary to go away; and a
_villegiatura_ in England is so dull!"

"What, go abroad!" said Lady Glenmore with unfeigned surprise.

"_Vous êtes impayable_," rejoined Lady Tenderden, "_comme j'ai souvent
eu l'honneur de vous dire_. One would imagine you lived a hundred years
ago, when people talked of going abroad as they would of going to the
moon;--but, now, abroad is at home. _Allons!_ I will not allow you to
hesitate. Leave me to settle the matter with Glenmore. I will arrange
every thing; and he shall come and meet you, and bring you home, in
case I choose to pass the winter at Paris."

Lady Glenmore had not the least idea that her husband would think of
consenting to this proposal, but gave a sort of half acquiescence, more
to escape from Lady Tenderden's persecuting entreaties, than from any
wish to realize the scheme; and she was quite astonished, some days
afterwards, to find Lord Glenmore of opinion that this plan would be
the pleasantest thing in the world for her, the best adapted to recruit
her health, and in all ways the most eligible. Half grieved at the
thoughts of absence from him, half gratified at his eager desire to
procure her a pleasure, and persuaded at length by his solicitations
to try the remedy of change of air for the languor which had of late
appeared to have affected her naturally good constitution,--the wish
too of yielding implicit obedience to his will,--all combined to
determine to consent; and she finally agreed to the proposed excursion,
which was soon followed by preparations and arrangements for their
departure to Barèges.




CHAPTER XI.

MARRIAGE MANŒUVRES.


While events thus intimately connected with Lady Glenmore's
happiness were silently progressing, Lord Albert D'Esterre's mind
was engrossed and torn by a thousand contending feelings of a nature
wholly different, but not less fatally destructive of his peace.
After recovering from the violence of the first shock which Lady
Dunmelraise's sudden departure had occasioned, he had remained torpid
and incapable of action: then again, inwardly harassed by the most
lively anxiety, he had awaited, with an agony of suspense which none
can know save those who have experienced how "hope deferred maketh the
heart sick," the communication which he felt Lady Dunmelraise could not
possibly long delay, relative to Lady Adeline.

During each of the four and twenty hours which had passed since the
blow had fallen on him, Lord Albert had thus been the victim of one
contradictory passion or other: but still, in the alternate storm
or lull of his emotions, he had mechanically sought the society of
the only person in the world whom he now believed entered into his
feelings, or took any real interest in his fate. It may be readily
supposed that Lady Hamlet Vernon did not lose the advantage which this
undivided share of his time afforded her; and she found means, even in
the state of apathy in which Lord Albert seemed plunged, and during
the lengthened silence to which, at intervals, he gave way even in her
presence, to impress him, by a thousand attentions, with a sense of
the deep sympathy she felt in all his sufferings. At the same time,
she knew the wound that rankled at his heart was yet too recent to be
rudely touched, and the paroxysm of his malady too violent to bear
those remedies which, with the skilful and tender solicitude of one
who watches a patient on the bed of sickness, she awaited a favourable
moment to administer, but forced not injudiciously upon his acceptance.

With one exception only, no event occurred, no word was spoken, no
circumstance had been alluded to, that could in the remotest degree
bring forward the dreaded name of Lady Adeline. When, however, Lord
Albert heard, accidentally, at Lady Hamlet Vernon's, that Mr. Foley had
also left town a few days after Lady Dunmelraise, his feelings were
roused to a pitch that nearly decided him on hastening to Dunmelraise
in person. Nor is it probable, notwithstanding Lord Albert's former
resolves, that he would longer have hesitated to take this step, had
he not been assured, in the most pointed and positive manner, by Lady
Hamlet herself (who foresaw and dreaded the effect of this natural
impulse), that Mr. Foley had _not_ followed Lady Adeline, but was gone
on a visit to some other part of the country.

This intelligence again changed the current of his feelings, and for
the moment he was lulled into a security, that while his rival appeared
not in Adeline's presence, she would have leisure and freedom of mind
to reflect and repent of the cruelty of her behaviour towards himself;
and vainly imagined that there was better hope in leaving her to the
workings of her own heart, than by giving way to any reproaches which
he might have made.

Thus he lost the only chance that remained to him, of avoiding the blow
which was so soon to annihilate all hope. It was a fortnight after Lady
Adeline's leaving London, that the post brought him a letter, at sight
of the well-known characters of which he trembled; for with one glance
he recognized them to be the hand-writing of Lady Dunmelraise. He knew
that that letter must be the arbiter of his fate, that it must lead to
an explanation; and he felt that no explanations were likely to prove
happy ones. For a few moments he held the letter in his hand, dreading
to break the seal, for he was aware that it was the messenger which was
either to condemn him to the loss of Adeline, or give him the power to
seek her as his wife; and, of the latter, something within his breast
forbade the hope. At length he slowly tore open the paper, and, with a
gasping eagerness, read as follows:

     "My dear Lord Albert D'Esterre,

 "The period which was to decide the fulfilment of the wishes
 entertained by Lord Tresyllian and the late Lord Dunmelraise
 respecting yourself and Lady Adeline has at length arrived. Wishes
 of this kind, however, are unfortunately too often subject to the
 same changes which attend on every thing earthly; and it would
 be weak, therefore, as well as wrong, to lament over them when
 unrealized: still less should we do so, when their accomplishment no
 longer appears to hold out that prospect of felicity which, in the
 present instance, I am certain, was the only motive for their first
 indulgence. I need not, my lord, enter upon the reasons which have
 induced my daughter to resign the honour of an alliance with your
 house: they will naturally suggest themselves to your own heart; and
 if they do not do this, I consider an explanation of them would be an
 intrusion on my part, of which I should be sorry to be guilty.

 "I remain, my dear Lord Albert D'Esterre,

     "Your very faithful and obedient

     "ELIZA DUNMELRAISE."

 "P. S. I forward a copy of my letter to Lord Tresyllian by this post."

"It is then as I thought," exclaimed Lord Albert. "Faithless,
treacherous, cold-hearted Adeline! why did I ever love you? Why place
my happiness on so frail, so unworthy a tenure? But it is well; it is
better thus. Since I have now no cause to mourn your loss, I will not
suffer grief for such an object to master me. It is well that you are
lost to me. Lost!"--he started at the sound, as he repeated, "Yes, lost
to me for ever!" and his lip trembled, while a sense of suffocation
oppressed and overpowered him, and tears, burning tears, burst from his
eyes. Not softly, not refreshingly, did they flow, but like the lava's
flood, which scathes the path down which it courses. For two days and
two nights Lord Albert remained in the most pitiable state of mind. He
would see no one, for to whom could he unburthen his griefs? and not
to speak of them was impossible: to whom would he deign to show his
lacerated heart? yet to what other subject than that by which it was
torn could he give utterance?

The necessity of replying to Lady Dunmelraise's letter was the first
thing that aroused him from this lethargy of sorrow; but when he
essayed the task, he found it one of no easy nature. He read and
_re-read_ the letter; he endeavoured to extract from it some gleam of
hope, some opening of possible change; but it was so calm, so cuttingly
and despairingly reasonable, so dignified yet so decided in its tone,
so meek yet so authoritative, that he felt it pronounced a verdict
which admitted of no appeal.

"Be it so," he said, with the composure of despair; "but, at least, I
too will speak my mind. Yet how? In a brief answer embody a world of
thought? How can words convey the sense of a broken heart? No! language
cannot do that. And if it could paint my feelings, why should I humble
myself before those who have thus sported with and spurned them? why
lay bare the weakness of my heart to those who have proved themselves
incapable of compassion? What can I expect to gain by so doing?
Nothing."

Blinded by this false reasoning, he felt, at that moment, that he would
have rejected Lady Adeline's hand, could he have gained it; convinced,
as he was, that her affections were no longer his own. Besides, who
ever reclaimed or regained a heart by reproaches? And then again
relapsing into tenderness, he mourned over the defalcation of that
purity and truth which he had worshipped even more than her charms. All
these, and more than these, were the thoughts which checked the flow of
Lord Albert's pen as he wrote copy after copy in answer to the letter,
and tore each, in despair of ever writing one which could in any degree
comprise or convey his mixed and agonized feelings.

But again the necessity of some answer pressed upon him; and, although
with the conviction that none which he could write at that moment would
be adequate to express what he felt, or prove a faithful interpreter of
the thousand tortures that possessed him, he finally traced and folded
up a few brief sentences, sealing the envelope immediately, as if to
preclude the possibility of further delay. Yet once more he hesitated,
once more a wish arose to write altogether in a different tone and
strain; but then he rapidly recalled to his aid all his late reasonings
and feelings on the subject, and finally despatched the following
letter:

     "Dear Lady Dunmelraise,

 "It would be doing injustice to my own feelings, if I did not state
 that they alone have prevented my answering your letter sooner;
 the purpose and tenor of which made me too plainly feel, that any
 development of the sufferings called forth by its contents would be
 equally misplaced and obtrusive to you, as well as to Lady Adeline.

 "To say that any emotion of _surprise_ has mingled with my sorrow
 would be contrary to truth, because I had felt the sudden and
 unexpected departure of your ladyship from London (not even
 communicated to me till your present letter) announced some decided
 change in your opinion and determinations in regard to myself. There
 is one point, however, for which, in the midst of all my sufferings,
 I must feel grateful: it is, that the letter which announces to me
 the forfeiture of that happiness which for years I have been taught
 to cherish and consider as my own, leaves me no doubt that the
 future welfare of Lady Adeline now centres in some other object, in
 the attainment of which it will be more surely realized, than had it
 continued to rest on me. That that welfare may be realized in every
 sense of the word will ever be the prayer of,

     "Dear Lady Dunmelraise,

     "Your faithful and affectionate servant,

     "D'ESTERRE."

 "P. S. I shall of course communicate your letter, accompanied by my
 answer, to my father, Lord Tresyllian."

No sooner was this letter beyond the power of Lord Albert's recall,
and actually on the way to Dunmelraise, than he would have given every
thing he possessed could he have changed its tenor: but this was only
one of those fluctuations of passion, of which he had of late been so
cruelly the sport; and the impulse of the moment, had its object been
attained, would as readily have given place to some other of a quite
different tendency. When the mind is once suffered to float about
without a guiding principle of action, it is a mercy and a miracle if
the being thus actuated does not become the prey of destruction.

As Lord Albert perused over and over again the copy of his answer, he
imagined he read in it sufficient ground to call forth an explanation,
on the part of Lady Dunmelraise, of the causes which had led to her
sudden abandonment of Lady Adeline's engagement with himself. But then
he speculated upon objects which like a blind man he could not see;
for never admitting, nor indeed feeling conscious, that it was his own
errors which had wrought the change in Lady Adeline, he never could
rightly apprehend the line of conduct which of necessity she must
pursue. If he had done so, had he taken the beam from his own eye, then
would he clearly have seen to take the mote from hers; and it would
not have required a second perusal of his answer to Lady Dunmelraise
to have acknowledged that it afforded no opening whatever, whether
from its tone or its contents, to induce herself or Lady Adeline to
swerve from the course they had adopted, or lead them to any other
determination than that which they had already avowed.

He however endeavoured to make himself think otherwise, and in some
degree he succeeded in this object; for what distortion will the
imagination not assume when warped by passion? In this delusive hope he
continued for some days, vainly expecting every post to bring him some
communication from Dunmelraise. How little he knew Lady Dunmelraise's
feelings! how falsely he judged of his own! As soon as she perused
his letter, she did not for a moment think of replying to it. She
had indeed not doubted, for weeks past, that Lord Albert's heart and
affections were totally alienated from her child; but the degree of
cold indifference with which, in her _reading_ of his answer, he seemed
to cast her off, exceeded what she could have thought possible. It
may be that, in her interpretation of the letter, Lady Dunmelraise
yielded in some degree to her previously-formed prejudices; and, as
is ever the case when we yield to prejudice, saw through them as
through a glass darkly, and pronounced the being who could thus coldly
renounce such a treasure as Adeline wholly unworthy of further thought.
Far from feeling, therefore, that Lord Albert's reply required any
further notice, or that it contained any thing which could raise an
after-regret if passed by in silence, or reanimate a dying spark of
hope in Lady Adeline's breast, she considered it final and definitive,
and without hesitation placed the letter in her daughter's hands.

Lady Adeline's sentiments, on having perused it, were in accordance
with Lady Dunmelraise's; but as soon as the first brief flush of
indignation had passed away, the bitterness of sorrow that was rooted
in her heart claimed its full power, and _grief, not anger_, preyed
like a canker on the bloom of her existence. Lady Dunmelraise watched,
week after week, with an anxiety proportioned to its object, for a
return of something like cheerfulness on the countenance of her dear
child; but though resignation sat on Lady Adeline's pallid brow, and
beamed in her angel smile, still there was a settled melancholy, a
change of fearful import, impressed on her whole person. Even her very
movements, once so gay and elastic, were now languid and measured, like
one who was soon to pass to another sphere. Nothing of the vivacity of
her age and temperament remained; and Lady Dunmelraise felt that she
waited for the hoped-for change in vain.

It was therefore some relief to her, when a visit from Mr. Foley
created a variety in the daily routine of their lives; and Lady
Dunmelraise thought or fancied that the exertions which Lady Adeline
made, in order to be agreeable to one for whom she had always
entertained a maternal solicitude, seemed the only circumstance that
at all dissipated the gloom in which her daughter was now habitually
involved. Mr Foley, however, while he remarked this favourable
change, ascribed it to other motives; and with that self-love which
predominated in his character, he saw in it a growing preference
for himself, and waited only for a season in which he conceived the
feelings of Lady Dunmelraise and her daughter would be sufficiently
prepared to admit of a disclosure of his sentiments, to make an open
avowal of them.

Meanwhile, Lord Albert, who was equally with Lady Adeline the victim
of self-delusion and martyred affection, continued to drag through the
heavy hours till even suspense itself became blunted. But Lord Albert
continued to strengthen himself in what he deemed the duplicity and
heartlessness of her conduct, and found a diversion to his sufferings
in the idea that they were occasioned by an unworthy object, whom
he was called upon by every rational principle to banish from his
remembrance.

At length it likewise became known to him that Mr. Foley was actually
an inmate of Dunmelraise, and this circumstance set the seal to the
erroneous conviction which for so many months had been gaining on his
deluded mind. Whilst thus discarded, as he imagined, by her whom he
had, in fact, always loved dearer than the whole world beside; wounded
in his tenderest feelings, and offended in his family pride; Lord
Albert unhappily found himself supported in his mistaken apprehensions
by his father, Lord Tresyllian, who, accustomed to refer most actions
to love of aggrandisement and power, and having survived those softer
affections which at one time bound him to Lord Dunmelraise, and made
him anxiously wish for a union between their children, now only saw
in Lady Dunmelraise's withdrawing from this engagement some concealed
object of interest, which impelled him scornfully to resent her
behaviour, and thus confirm the delusive views of his son.

From the time of Lord Albert's having come of age, the entire
independence of his circumstances had (without violation, however, of
any filial duty on his part) occasioned his intercourse with his father
to be of rare occurrence; but when he communicated the purport of Lady
Dunmelraise's letter to Lord Tresyllian, an identity of feelings seemed
to arise between them; and in their offended pride a tie of sympathy
was freshly formed, by which they mutually encouraged each other in an
ill-founded and unjust resentment.

Lord Albert's heart, however, was far differently constituted from
his father's, and in most other respects they felt not together.
Still, therefore, he found himself alone, as it were, in the world,
without one kindred breast on which to lean. Perhaps no sensation
of pain is greater than this conscious loneliness of being. He had
hitherto avoided all open confidence with Lady Hamlet Vernon on the
subject of Lady Adeline; for though she was well acquainted with
all that had passed, yet, from motives of delicacy, as well as from
a secret mistrust even of her sympathy, he had remained silent.
But when at length freed from the only tie which sealed his lips,
the long-cherished and lingering hope of Lady Adeline's returning
affection, it required no stimulus to make Lord Albert unburthen his
heart and all its griefs to one, the only one, who, he thought, entered
into them. The subject once commenced, the whole troubled tide of
fears, belief, conviction, and subsequent indignation, was poured into
her ear.

Too readily, and with too greedy delight, did she receive this
confidence, as the sweet confirmation of all her long-nurtured and
most ardent wishes; and the first step she took, in consequence, to
heighten his resentment against Lady Adeline, was to avow a knowledge
of Mr. Foley's long residence at Dunmelraise to be the result of his
passion for her; a passion approved, she said, by Lady Dunmelraise, as
well as by her daughter, and which was soon to terminate in marriage;
adding, at the same time, that she felt, as well as their mutual
friends (meaning Lady Tilney and her _coterie_), that it was matter of
congratulation that an alliance so thoroughly destructive to his views
and pursuits of life should thus be dissolved.

While in this manner Lady Hamlet Vernon fixed the dagger more firmly
in Lord Albert's breast, she no longer hesitated to evince for him, in
every word, and look, and action, her devotedness; and it was not in
nature, that under such an influence he should be allowed to retrace
his steps, even had he wished to do so, or to reflect on his own
conduct; although, had he had recourse to self-examination, even in
this stage of the business, he might still have retrieved his error.

Day after day, week after week, his diseased state of mind gained
ground, till at length the whole moral man became corrupt, and Lord
Albert was the slave of her whom he would have loathed, could he but
have seen the snare she had so artfully drawn around him. It is true,
the duties of his official situation employed him some hours every
morning; and in the routine of these there was no analogy to any thing
like feeling, so that they proved a temporary antidote to pain: but
when they were over, he was in the society of Lady Hamlet Vernon, and
of Lady Hamlet Vernon alone; for it was the nature of a mind like his
to be wholly engrossed by one object.

The world, that in reality cares for no one's actions, except as
affecting itself, looked on with indifference, and saw in Lord
Albert's course only curious matter for speculation. Some pitied him
as a fool, should he contemplate matrimony with Lady Hamlet Vernon;
while others applauded the dexterity of the woman who could succeed
in leading him captive, and secure to herself so great a prize. But
one friend yet remained to Lord Albert, who would have sincerely
lamented the circumstance, could he have believed such an event as
marriage possible; because though Lady Hamlet Vernon was undoubtedly
clever, handsome, fascinating, yet he saw in her no sound intrinsic
qualities, nor was there attached to her rank or situation any of that
preponderating family influence, which he could have wished should
distinguish the wife of his friend. But Lord Glenmore was not one of
those who doubted Lord Albert's good sense or principles; and though
he saw him involved in a _liaison_ which he was far from approving,
still he looked upon it as one of those temporary attachments from
which he hoped soon to see him liberated, and therefore discarded all
serious fears for him. But Lord Glenmore was unfortunately mistaken.
The entanglement in which Lord Albert was involved was not one easily
to be broken through.

Lady Hamlet Vernon's object was advancing rapidly, and her victim
nearly sacrificed. London was now almost empty. The only individuals
of note remaining in it were some official persons, who were looking
forward with anxiety to the moment of their departure. Lady Glenmore's
arrangements for her visit to the continent had been finally adjusted;
and she had at length quitted town with a heart divided between regret
at leaving her husband, and that kind of anticipated pleasure which
attends a first visit to a foreign country.

Whether any regret mingled with these sentiments, as she journeyed
with Lady Tenderden to the point of embarkation, at the idea of being
likely to lose in her absence the society of Mr. Leslie Winyard,
it is difficult to say; and equally so whether the result of this
absence would break through that intimacy with the latter, which
her _soi-disant_ friends considered to be of such perilous tendency.
Mr. Leslie Winyard certainly did not leave town immediately on her
departure.

In the midst of these final removals for the season, Lady Hamlet Vernon
found it difficult to arrange her passing the approaching autumn in the
society of Lord Albert. To propose to himself directly any project of
the kind was, she thought, hazardous; and though feeling the importance
of securing to herself his presence, she was obliged to trust to
chance, and to the habitual influence which she knew she had obtained
over him, in order to ensure his following her wherever she went.

"Where do you mean to pass your autumn, Lord Albert?" she said one day
to him, speaking as if in an unpremeditated manner, and announcing at
the same time her intention of going to Tunbridge. "Perhaps you will be
induced, if you have no other plan in view, to pay me a visit there?"

"Yes," he replied, sighing, "I shall like it exceedingly. Where can _I_
go but where you are? Nobody else in the wide world, save yourself,
cares for me;"--and a tender glance from Lady Hamlet Vernon gave back a
confirmation of the latter part of this querulous speech.

Many days more did not elapse, when Lord Albert, although pressed by
Lord Glenmore in the most friendly manner to accompany him to his
country seat during the recess, misled by the unfortunate and false
conviction that no one participated in his feelings save her who had
in reality caused their bitterness, blindly yielded to the delusion of
this hollow attachment, and found himself loitering round Lady Hamlet
Vernon's footsteps on the furze-clad hills of Tunbridge.




CHAPTER XII.

PROCEEDINGS ABROAD.


However small the interest which Lady Tilney really took in preserving
the purity of Lady Glenmore's character _intacte_, still her wishes for
the preservation of that outward decorum which she deemed necessary
towards the maintenance of her _coterie_'s respectability were
perfectly sincere. It will not, however, appear that in this instance
her wishes were likely to be realized.

On landing on the continent, the point to which Lady Glenmore and Lady
Tenderden directed their steps was Spa, having abandoned their previous
intention of going to Barèges; a change in their plans, which they
decided upon partly from the length of the journey, and partly from
Lady Glenmore's not liking to be so very far from her husband. When
they reached Spa, they found some few of their acquaintance already
there, foreigners as well as English; and ten days had not elapsed
from their arrival, before Mr. Leslie Winyard, accompanied by Lord
Gascoigne, joined their circle.

Lady Tenderden had already made a selection of such as were to
constitute her society, and of course these latter persons were
admitted in the number. Allowing for change of place and difference of
hours, the same desultory mode of life was pursued by them at Spa as in
London, and at best the same vacuity of mind and intention became the
result. This negative description of the passing hours, however, was
not applicable to all. Of course, in the present instance, there could
have been but one motive which induced Mr. Leslie Winyard to resign the
pleasures of an English autumn for the waters of Spa; and this fact he
seemed at no pains to conceal. Lady Glenmore was his avowed object.

There is something always unfavourable to virtuous happiness in the
_voluntary_ absence of a wife from her husband, and especially if she
has designedly or carelessly, from vanity or _désœuvrement_, given
encouragement to marked attentions from any other than her husband.
Whatever may be alleged by some, that absence makes meeting sweeter,
and renovates affection, it may be laid down as a rule well known to
experience, that genuine wedded love is best maintained by that sweet
habitude which renders each a part of the other, and which feels not
that it can live separate from that dearer self; and happy, and only
truly happy, are those married persons who, in an honest heart, feel
that they can add to love virtue, and to virtue habit; so that, when
long years have gone by as a tale that is told, they can look back upon
their course with joy, and feel it dearer as they know it to have been
hallowed by the _lungo costume_ and the _dolce memorie_.

_Unnecessary_ absences, on the contrary, between married persons,
are at best very dangerous experiments: they induce in women an
independence of feeling inimical to tenderness, and incompatible with
the duties of a wife; and encourage, on the part of others, an intimacy
and a freedom of manner, to the abandonment of those forms which, in
the presence of the husband, would perhaps be observed.

Thus it was in the case of Lady Glenmore. Mr. Leslie Winyard, already
too much encouraged by her easy good-nature and affability, impelled by
vanity to suppose himself irresistible when he chose to give himself
the trouble of being so, and not wholly indifferent to her whom he now
pursued, considered Lady Glenmore's absence from England as intended
to afford an opportunity for the furtherance of their intimacy. The
mode of life at Spa, and similar places on the continent, where the
English congregate, however resembling the empty folly of London in its
moral effect, differs in this respect, that it is more like living in
a family circle, divested of the ceremonious restraints of societies
in great cities. The daily routine of arrangements which threw all
those who circled together into an unavoidable familiarity, the long
excursions during the day, the repose under some shade after fatigue,
the return at night, the supper, the dance that not unfrequently
followed, proved all of them too favourable opportunities for a man of
intrigue.

If, therefore, Lady Glenmore was in peril, when guarded by the forms of
society, in the presence of a husband whom she loved, and feeling the
wholesome moral check which, to a young mind entering on the snares of
life, the consciousness of a supposed cognizance of parents and friends
so usefully imposes,--if, under all these circumstances of protection,
she had yielded to, or rather been entangled in, an indiscretion
respecting her intimacy with Mr. Leslie Winyard,--how much more fearful
was her present danger, when no restraints of the kind were at hand to
guard or to warn her!

Had Lady Tilney's object been of that true and high nature which
proposed no result but to save Lady Glenmore's virtue, she would
not have intrusted her to the guardianship of such a person as Lady
Tenderden, who united to the airy flightiness of a Frenchwoman the
spirit of an _intrigante_, which is to be found in all nations. But
Lady Tilney's object was merely worldly and prudential, namely, that
of removing a probable _fracas_ from her own circle in England; and
this point carried, the other was of small importance. Lady Tenderden
had drawn round her a society at Spa, quite in harmony with that which
she had been accustomed to live in. There were several persons of the
_coterie_ of London, who, from time to time, made their appearance
among them, and kept up the tone of the _rassemblement_ to its own
peculiar pitch. Mingled with these were foreigners of distinction and
diplomatists of various nations, who, from forming a false estimate
of English society, as most foreigners do, fall into a very natural
mistake respecting the higher classes in England, of whom they judge
_en masse_ by the limited specimen which they are taught to consider
as the sample of our nobility, and who therefore, with this false
view, circled round Lady Tenderden and her friends on the present
occasion, as the centre of attraction and a model of English manners; a
melancholy mistake, and one by which foreigners have been led into the
greatest errors respecting our higher classes.

Although this remark did not at first apply personally to Lady
Glenmore, yet, under the circumstances of the case, Lady Tenderden
was not a fitting guardian in any respect for her; and in the end,
during their residence at Spa, the permission of Leslie Winyard's
_dévouement_ made it attach to her with too much truth, and she became,
consequently, as much the subject of animadversion and example as
Lady Tenderden herself. In the life of dissipation thus followed, not
even the seventh day was left for reflection or repose. The too often
misapplied and dangerous adage, that "one must do at Rome as they do
at Rome," was an excuse for entirely forgetting the Sabbath to keep
it holy, an observance which is in some degree attended to amongst us
(except by the most notoriously profligate); but it has been a just
reproach of many thinking Roman Catholics on our nation, that, when
abroad, we lay aside the religion we profess, at least its forms, while
we laugh at those which _they_ follow.

Of what religion are we, then? might be the natural question asked, and
was one which applied certainly to Lady Glenmore, who had now learnt
the most fatal of all lessons, that it is unnecessary to hallow the
Sabbath day; and she went on to learn, that she could live and be happy
without her husband. Letters came from him, breathing kindness and
affection, and these were answered with something like a corresponding
feeling, for still in her heart his image was enshrined, although her
vanity betrayed her into the perilous error of being engrossed at the
moment by the attentions and presence of another. Lord Glenmore's
letters, however, contained no hope of his being able to join her at
Spa; for government contemplated an earlier assembling of parliament
than usual, and the presence of all the ministers was required at an
unusually early period. This circumstance, however, affected Lady
Glenmore but little, for her regret was waning into carelessness at his
absence. Thus bound to England, Lord Glenmore expressed his wish that
Lady Glenmore should leave Spa about the end of October or middle of
November, and proceed by the way of Paris, where he still indulged a
faint hope that he should be able to join her.

Notwithstanding much dissuasion on the part of Lady Tenderden and
Mr. Leslie Winyard against obeying these injunctions, Lady Glenmore
remained firm, and they shortly after were on their way to Paris.
Mr. Leslie Winyard, of course, took his route to Paris likewise; for
though he began to feel that the affair _trainé en longueur_, he was
determined at least to enjoy the _renommée_ of adding another name
to the list of his successes. At Paris the rumour of his attachment
to Lady Glenmore found a wider range, and amongst the mixed, and
larger aggregate of English, became the subject of more marked and
varied observation. Here, therefore, in the same selfish spirit of
worldly-mindedness which had induced Lady Tilney to send Lady Glenmore
to the continent, Lady Tenderden saw the propriety of giving some
admonitory hints to the latter: such as, "_It was not well to stake
all on one throw_: that it was not in _good taste_ to have but one
cavalier always in attendance; and that the _préféré_ himself would
cease to be flattered by that preference, if he had _champ libre_
always at command, without any competitors to dispute the honour with
him. Besides, there is a certain _retenue_ to be observed," she went
on to say, "by women of fashion, who should never give the vulgar an
advantage over them, by not having a ready reply to make, or be made,
to any disadvantageous or impertinent observations: for example, if
they should say, 'Mr. Leslie Winyard is always at Lady Glenmore's
elbow,' it might be answered, 'And so is Prince Luttermanne, and Lord
Gascoigne, and Lord Baskerville, and a thousand others.' A little
address, my dear Lady Glenmore, sets all this sort of things to rights;
only one must know how to conduct oneself."

"There is nothing wrong," replied the still innocent but somewhat
perplexed Lady Glenmore, "and therefore there is nothing to set right."

"_Non, assurément, nothing wrong_," answered Lady Tenderden; adding
in her _doucereux_ voice, with more of truth than was usual under her
_patte de velours_, "and that is _just the reason_ why you are not
sufficiently upon your guard."

These hints, however, appeared so indirect in their tendency, and of so
little consequence in the eyes of her to whom they were addressed, that
they were merely smiled at, and passed by unheeded.

In this state matters continued till far on in November. It was the
very season when Paris was beginning to fill. A few weeks of protracted
absence from home was again pleaded for by Lady Tenderden, even though
Lord Glenmore, from press of business in the ministry, had been obliged
to abandon all idea of joining them; and accordingly they lingered on
from day to day at Paris.

The same cause which prevented Lord Glenmore from leaving London
obliged Lord Albert D'Esterre to quit Brighton, whither he had
accompanied Lady Hamlet Vernon. In returning to the subject of this
_liaison_, few particulars can be adduced which would not appear trite
and stale. Like all intimacies of the same nature, it had during
this interval gradually approached a climax. Nothing in this world
is stationary: the world itself is passing swiftly away; but the use
or abuse we make of existence remains. Lord Albert's intimacy with
Lady Hamlet Vernon, must of necessity have either assumed a decided
character, or have been totally broken off; and, unfortunately for
him, she played too deep a stake to lose for one moment that vigilance
and foresight for which she was so distinguished, and which alone had
constituted the success of her designs. It may be readily imagined that
she now redoubled all her care, to secure the prize which was so nearly
within her grasp. During the last few weeks, in which Lord Albert and
herself had continued isolated from all other society, with nothing
to call his attention away from her, or to direct the current of his
thoughts into any other channel, the result may be easily guessed.

Lord Albert made proposals of marriage; and it is unnecessary to add
they were accepted with a transport of joy which Lady Hamlet Vernon
could ill conceal within the bounds of prudence, but which, to his
deluded view, appeared to be the effusion of a genuine and devoted
passion. It is impossible for any generous nature not to feel gratified
by the devotion of another; and Lord Albert was glad to mistake this
gratitude for a tenderer and more spontaneous movement of the heart.
Yet, as the moment approached for allying himself for ever to any other
than her whose image, in despite of all his endeavours to the contrary,
came back to him at intervals in the clouds of the air, in the shadows
of the waters, or the dreams of the night, he sought for delay. Strange
to say, too, some lingering doubt of Lady Adeline Seymour's becoming
the wife of Mr. Foley at times crossed his fancy, for it was more like
a vision of the fancy than a rational belief; but still he wished to
think that she should be the first to bind herself to another; and with
a feeling not amenable to the laws of reason, he looked anxiously in
the newspapers every day to see the announcement of her nuptials.

Under these circumstances, and with this feeling, he was called to town
to attend official business, with the hope, however, in a few days, of
returning to Lady Hamlet Vernon. Arrived in London, he found himself,
the first time for many months, absent from her, and robbed of the
illusory charm of her society; a charm which he had taught himself to
consider as necessary to him as the air he breathed. He now found, when
official duties were over, that the hours hung heavily on his hands.

It had perhaps been owing to the idea of his having so long indulged
in a selfish gratification, which must of necessity have drawn down
observations derogatory to the character of Lady Hamlet Vernon, that
had finally determined Lord Albert to make her the offer of his hand.
But now, when away from her influence, he looked back upon the gulf
over which he had passed, and contemplated it with somewhat different
sensations; conscious that the step he had taken was irretrievable, he
felt less than ever disposed to seek diversion from his own thoughts,
or relief from them in any other quarter. He even avoided much
intercourse with Lord Glenmore, as though he was afraid the latter
should read his secret; for it was intended that his marriage should
yet be kept profoundly secret; partly in compliance with his own
feelings, which suggested that the world (and who can, or who ought to
be totally reckless of the world's award?) might blame him for allying
himself to a woman of Lady Hamlet Vernon's character, and partly at the
instance of the latter, who, though she could not explain the cause of
her apprehensions, yet dreaded lest the cup should be dashed from her
lips by some unforeseen interference.

The time that Lord Albert did not pass literally in business, he
employed in reading over Lady Hamlet Vernon's letters, which he
received daily, or in answering them; and as those she wrote breathed
the most impassioned language, his own contained enough of that
reflected hue of tenderness in them to please, if not to satisfy,
her to whom they were addressed. The time was past when solitude and
reflection could avail Lord Albert; for he had decided his fate. It was
his duty, therefore, now, as well as his interest, to encourage himself
in the belief that he truly loved the present object to whom he devoted
himself; and he carefully endeavoured to shut out all remembrances
which might recall the thought of another. Lord Albert had been nearly
three weeks absent from Lady Hamlet Vernon, when he hastened one
morning at an earlier hour than usual to Downing-street, where his
letters were always directed. He found one from her, as was customary;
but, in taking it eagerly in his hand, he was aware it did not consist,
as usual, of many sheets, but was a single letter in an envelope.

Something, he knew not what, struck him with agitation on this
recognition, and he paused on breaking the seal; then cast his eyes
hurriedly over the open page, and looked in vain for the terms of
endearment which were wont to be the first that courted his glance;
and he grew sick and dizzy as he read the first few lines, which ran
thus: "Grieved I am at heart, and stunned by this fatal blow, so
unexpected, so subversive of all our hopes. Is it not possible that,
in the dismay of the moment, you may have interpreted more severely
the words of Lady Dunmelraise than they required?" Lord Albert started
at the name of Dunmelraise, and held the letter from him, and gazed at
it again. "Lady Dunmelraise!" he repeated aloud. "What can this allude
to? And in Amelia's hand!" Again he looked at the letter, and turned
over the page, and saw the signature. A death-like shudder seized him,
and an icy chill ran through his heart. As his eye continued to run
rapidly along the lines, it met the words, "dearest Mr. Foley." Again
he paused. But he was not now in a state to reason on the propriety of
reading through a letter evidently not addressed to himself, although
he continued to do so; but, breathless with surprise, in vain essayed
to read collectedly. At length, mastering the contending feelings which
for a few moments overpowered him, he perused the letter consecutively.

 "Grieved I am at heart, and stunned by this fatal blow, so unexpected,
 so subversive of all our hopes. Is it not possible that, in the dismay
 of the moment, you may have interpreted more severely the words of
 Lady Dunmelraise than they required? Yet when I return to the copy
 of her letter, which you enclose to me, I cannot but think with you
 that there is nothing to hope. Still, how strange that both she and
 Lady Adeline should have allowed those demonstrations of your passion,
 which they must have understood, for such a length of time, without
 expressing any explicit disapprobation! And then you say, too, that
 you are confident, from every circumstance, and every word, and every
 look, that has occurred, or fallen, either from Lady Dunmelraise or
 her daughter, that D'Esterre no longer holds any place either in
 their affections or their esteem; and the conversation you report
 to have heard between Lady Delamere and her sister was certainly
 as conclusive as any thing could be of their utter rejection of the
 thought of any renewal of engagement with D'Esterre." (Lord Albert
 groaned aloud.)

 "I know not what advice to give you. I dare not urge upon you a
 perseverance in your suit, because that might eventually, if Lady
 Dunmelraise and her daughter are firmly decided against it, draw
 down an interference which would give publicity to the affair; a
 circumstance, on all accounts, decidedly to be avoided. Hitherto, I
 should suppose what has passed has been confined to their own breasts;
 for Lady Dunmelraise is too much acquainted with the world to make
 herself, or any one belonging to her, unnecessarily the subject of
 public remark. At present, you know, the secret is safe in our own
 keeping; and after many hours of painful reflection as to what you had
 best do, I think nothing remains but your going immediately abroad for
 a time, to avoid the singularity of your absence from Dunmelraise.

 "In regard to the heavy pecuniary disappointment which you must have
 experienced, dearest Mr. Foley, by this defeat of our plans, I hope
 I shall soon be in a situation to make you ample recompense; for
 D'Esterre has at length so openly declared himself, that my marriage
 cannot long be delayed; and that once accomplished, you may depend on
 my most constant exertions for all connected with your interest. In
 the meanwhile, should you require any funds for your sudden departure,
 I enclose a draft for £200. I would not have you come by Brighton to
 embark, which perhaps you might be inclined to do, knowing me to be
 there; and I think it better, for the present, that you do not write
 to me on this subject; but let me have a few lines announcing your
 arrival on the continent.

 "Again I repeat to you to count upon my most friendly assistance at
 all times. You may depend on my acquainting you, when the event on
 which now all depends shall have taken place;

     "And I am ever yours, affectionately,

     "AMELIA HAMLET VERNON."

 "P.S.--I would not have you state your intention of going abroad
 to any person; and prevent, if possible, any announcement of your
 departure in the newspapers."

No words can adequately convey an idea of Lord Albert's feelings as he
finished the perusal of this letter. It was plain, it was clear, that
a conspiracy had existed between Lady Hamlet Vernon and Mr. Foley, of
which he and Lady Adeline Seymour had become the victims. The detailed
process of language cannot concentrate in one point the thousand varied
feelings which combined in his bosom all the pangs of self-accusation
with all the joy of believing that the precious being whom he had
wronged was free from stain. Grief mingled with the conviction that
he had again found his own transcendent Adeline, bright in all her
purity, only to be convinced, at the same moment, that he had himself
placed a wide gulf between them that could never be overpassed; and the
knowledge that this was the case excited such overwhelming emotion in
his breast as defies the power of language.

It would be wrong, however, in this instance, as in all others where
reflection points a moral, not to observe the omnipotence of virtue,
which, it may be truly said, is a light to lighten our darkness; for
in the depth of Lord Albert's present sufferings there was a latent
spring of consolation in his heart, the cause of which he could little
understand or account for at the moment, and from which he was not
prepared to derive the benefit it was intended afterwards to convey;
and this consolation was a sense of humble contrition, derived from the
consciousness that the blow which had fallen upon him was righteously
dealt, and that it was only retributive justice that he should meet
his punishment from the very person for whom he had, in the indulgence
of his vanity, played with the feelings of another till at length he
sacrificed and lost her.

This sense of humility is ever the foundation of true repentance;
and true repentance brings resignation; and resignation is the balm
which soothes a wounded spirit. He soon felt that the merciful ways of
Providence had forced him unwillingly to a knowledge of his own fault,
and with a contrite heart he kissed the rod that smote him. He felt at
once as though a heavy burden were lifted from his breast. None of the
double-mindedness, none of the obscure uncertainty, by which of late he
had been oppressed and involved, now darkened his path. He was like one
who is brought from a prisoned cavern to rejoice in the wholesome air
and light of heaven. He no longer hesitated in his course, or wavered
how he should conduct himself, but determined to profit by the severe
lesson he had received, and act once more uprightly. He felt, as it
were, instantaneously, that he had never really loved Lady Hamlet
Vernon, and that vanity alone had betrayed him into her snare.

Had he loved her, would he not, even with the conscious proof before
him of her perfidious conduct, have at least mourned over a knowledge
of her baseness? As it was, he thought not of her, save in reference to
his own erring conduct.

"Oh Adeline, Adeline!" he exclaimed in bitterness of heart, "is it for
such a one as this that I have lost you, and deprived myself for ever,
not only of your affection, but your esteem? Yet, though to retrieve
the past is impossible, and to become what I once was in your eyes is
as impossible as it is to recover mine own consciousness of desert,
still I will live for you and you alone." The virtuous principle which
had thus been restored to its rightful place in Lord Albert's breast
gave him power to struggle with sorrow successfully in this his hour of
need: and though at intervals he sunk into that despondency which, lost
as he was to all his best affections and brightest hopes, could not
but flow back upon him with an overwhelming tide, still the sense of
returning virtue bore him up again, and fixed him on a rock from whence
no tide of circumstances could hurl him.

In this situation he thought, for a time, that he stood alone in the
world, without one sympathising friend; yet, perhaps, there was one
who still remained--Lord Glenmore. Should he open his heart to him?
Should he seek succour and counsel from him? No. Counsel he needed not,
for his mind was made up _how_ to act; and consolation could not, at
the present moment, flow from any earthly source. As involuntarily he
read over and over again Lady Hamlet Vernon's letter, a still renewing
sense of the baseness of the writer flashed upon him. In every turn and
phrase he thought he traced some clue to each individual circumstance
which had occurred to poison his mind, and give birth to the unworthy
suspicions he had entertained of his Adeline: every one of them, in
turn, seemed to rise up, as it were, in judgment against him; and again
he wondered how the artifices with which he had been deceived had not
before been detected by him.

The whole of his intimacy with Lady Hamlet Vernon, from its
commencement, was next reviewed. His mind went back to the first
evening in which he met her; her praises of his Adeline; the seductive
grace with which she expressed her hope, when he spoke of foreign
intimacies, that he would find some objects worthy also of his regard
and friendship in his native land. He saw, as if at the moment,
her downcast looks, and felt over again the surprise which her tone
and manner caused him. He recalled their interview at the church at
Restormel; her subsequent conversation, relative to Lady Adeline,
before he left that place for London; and in all these, and in every
other incident connected with his growing intimacy, he now beheld
the wily stratagem of a preconceived plan to win away his heart and
affection from one to whom this Circean destroyer of his peace was as
widely opposed as darkness to light.

This probing of his wounds, this investigation of the circumstances
which had involved him in error, was a wholesome though painful
exercise to his mind; for he traced his misery to its rightful
source--himself. He could not but dwell on the fearful and rapid change
which had been produced in him by a life passed in a circle whose whole
tendency was to undermine principle and destroy the understanding. He
asked himself, what was he now, compared to what he had been eighteen
months before? what action, during that period, could he recall without
blushing for the misuse or waste of time? How had his pursuits been
abandoned! his honourable views in life lost sight of! his studies
neglected! all the fruits of long and virtuous education scattered! and
himself become an object of his own and of all good men's contempt!

In reflections such as these, the hours passed away, on the day of his
receipt of the letter. He had hurried through his official business
as quickly as possible, in order to seek the retirement of his own
apartment; and there, with the picture of Adeline before him, he sat
absorbed in harrowing contemplation. So entirely had the current of
his affections been sent back to their proper channel by the revulsion
which had shaken him, that with the exception of perusing Lady Hamlet
Vernon's letter, for the purpose of bringing home more strongly the
clear conviction of her infamy, he had not felt one regret on her
account. Even the feeling of indignation, which conduct so base was
calculated naturally to excite, had not for more than a moment occupied
his heart; a heart which was as dead to any impression she could make
upon it, as though he had never known her.

Midnight had already passed, and the idea that Lady Hamlet Vernon would
be in ignorance the while of what had occurred had not struck him. He
then felt the painful part which he was called upon to perform, in
addressing the person whom he had been on the verge of making his
wife in language such as her conduct merited and his own reproaches
might dictate. He at length resolved to let the night pass, and in the
morning, if possible, to set himself to the task with a calmer mind.

He slept not, however, and arose feeling distracted and feverish.
Finding himself unable to go out, he sent, therefore, to Downing-street
for some official papers which were to be looked over. The messenger
brought back with these his letters also: amongst them there was one
from Lady Hamlet Vernon. His soul sickened at the sight, and he cast
it from him with disgust. He resolved not to open it, for he must
necessarily loathe the expressions of attachment with which he knew it
would be filled; and he determined to return it unopened, together with
his answer. This answer, in the course of the day, he despatched by
express; feeling, the moment he had given vent to his indignation, that
it was but justice to do so, both to himself, and to his injured and
lost Adeline.

The tenor of his reply may be easily conceived. He kept the original
of the letter which had so happily removed the veil of wickedness
from his eyes, but he transcribed a copy; and having animadverted on
the baseness of the arts that had been practised on himself, and the
fiend-like cruelty that had been exercised on the former cherished
object of his affections, he avowed his determination never again to
hold intercourse with her who had been the cause of so much misery and
delusion. At the same time, with a feeling of that nice honour and
noble generosity of soul which had never entirely left Lord Albert's
breast, he informed Lady Hamlet Vernon that her infamy would remain a
secret with him, unless her own future conduct towards himself should
make it necessary, in self-defence, to do otherwise.

Before this answer reached Lady Hamlet Vernon, she had been in some
degree prepared for the blow, for Mr. Foley, who was in town, on
receiving the letter which had been intended for Lord Albert, instantly
surmised the worst, and had proceeded with the utmost haste to
Brighton.--There Lord Albert's answer found him and Lady Hamlet Vernon
in all the dismay and terror which detection of so sinister an intrigue
would naturally cause.

The arrival of Lord Albert was hourly looked for by them, as the sure
consequence of what had taken place, in order to demand an explanation
of the letter which had fallen into his hands; for Lady Hamlet Vernon
was certain that she had written no other letter by that post except to
himself and Mr. Foley, and felt, therefore, a conviction on the subject
of his arrival, which was anticipated as a certainty: and although the
necessity of the moment obliged Mr. Foley and Lady Hamlet Vernon to be
in consultation together, a person was on the watch to apprise them of
his approach, so that Mr. Foley's presence might not strengthen the
suspicions already connected with his name.

Under these circumstances therefore, the arrival of a letter only was,
at the moment, rather a relief; though it had been felt by the parties
that there was more chance of Lord Albert's being still deceived, had
he been exposed to the influence of Lady Hamlet Vernon's charms in a
personal interview.--His letter was broken open in haste: the return
of her own last unopened, which fell from the envelope, sufficiently
foretold its purport. The messenger had departed after giving in the
packet, with a brief announcement that there was no reply. It would be
impossible to characterize all the feelings of disappointed passion,
self-interest, hatred, and revenge, together with the mutual reproaches
to which these gave birth between the detected actors of this infamous
intrigue.

After giving way, however, to the first ebullitions of anger against
each other, mutual recrimination, and all those scorpion-like feelings
which are the consequences of a copartnery in guilt, the sense of
necessity to secure self-preservation, and to shield themselves from
public ignominy, made them both catch eagerly at the terms of secrecy
implied in the latter sentence of Lord Albert's letter; and when
Lady Hamlet was convinced that there was no hope of regaining him
to her views, she felt the necessity of submission, and sheltering
herself under such terms as the exigency of the case required. All
love was banished from her breast by feelings of rage and shame at
her detection; and with the heartlessness of an _intrigante_, she
determined to put _bonne mine à mauvais jeu_, and boldly deny a guilt
which she knew could be but covertly imputed to her. She wrote an
answer, therefore, on the instant, to Lord Albert, couched in terms
such as the offended feelings of a haughty woman would dictate. In her
turn she cast off Lord Albert--"one for whose happiness she avowed that
she had been ready to sacrifice every thing. But now she found that
the very measures she had taken from pure devotion to himself had
been made matter of accusation against her; measures easily explained,
if an explanation had been solicited. It was he who had sought her
affections, not she his; and when he thus rudely rejected a heart which
he had taken pains to win, she could not but feel that she had escaped
from that irretrievable ruin which must have followed her union with
him." Having thus endeavoured to turn the tide of recrimination against
Lord Albert, the feeling which at the moment pressed most urgently upon
her was, as in the case of all criminal confederacies, to rid herself
of the insufferable presence of the partner of her crime; and therefore
pressing upon him the draft which had been intended originally to
remove him to the continent, she placed it in his hands for the same
purpose now, and in a few hours afterwards he had embarked for Dieppe.

Lord Albert read Lady Hamlet Vernon's communication with calm
indifference. His eyes were unsealed. He knew her character now too
thoroughly to be surprised: still less was he to be shaken from his
purpose; and was far more firmly resolved to pursue the right course
than he had ever been to follow the wrong: and wretched as he was at
heart, he found consolation in reflecting deeply on the merciful
interposition of a higher power than any earthly one, which had thus
snatched him from misery. Wretched as he was at heart, he found
consolation; and with this feeling commenced the arduous task of
bringing back his mind and heart to former principles of uprightness
and virtue.

Lady Hamlet Vernon, on her part, took a different course. Sensible that
to betray any feeling on the event would only draw down further remark
and observation, she again plunged into the society from which she had
of late withdrawn; and prolonging her stay at Brighton, avoided all
those unpleasant circumstances which, for a time at least, would have
attended her meeting Lord Albert in public.

Lord Albert D'Esterre had formed his resolution on a principle of
rectitude, and acted upon it with that degree of promptitude which is
the sure test of sincerity in well-doing. When the moment's exertion,
however, was over, his mind, enfeebled from the lengthened moral
disease under which it so long had laboured, shrunk back in conscious
weakness: and he became sensible, that however earnest the will may be,
the difficulty is great to retrace our steps from error; and that it
is still more difficult to regain firm footing in the path of virtue,
when we have wandered from it for any length of time.

The painful recollection of the hours he had lost, or more than lost,
the conviction of the misuse of his intellectual faculties, pressed
upon him with a leaden weight that seemed to defy all his efforts to
recover the power and energy of his mind. That solitude of the heart,
too, which was now in prospect before him, shed a gloom around; for,
for whom was he to live? was the natural question which now suggested
itself, and one not likely to meet a wise reply at the moment.

After-reflection, indeed, might tell him, that there is a higher
motive to live to virtue, than any which this world's affections can
afford; but to this nobler impulse he had unfortunately for the present
become insensible, and in having become so he had lost the surest
means of happiness. Lord Albert was, however, notwithstanding this
sense of destitution, unwilling, for many reasons, to throw himself on
the only stay left him--the supporting friendship of Lord Glenmore:
partly, perhaps, from that averseness to humble himself in the sight
of another, however dear, or however honourable, the individual may
be, which it is so common to human nature to feel; and also from many
mixed motives, alike of genuine good and _spurious_ quality, which
affect the purposes of all at some times and in some degree.

Lord Glenmore had in part heard and part guessed Lord Albert's rupture
with Lady Hamlet Vernon, and secretly rejoiced in the event: but
with the delicacy and kindliness of feeling which was his particular
characteristic, he tacitly entered into the unhappiness of his
friend; and thought, as he always did when he saw another fall into
temptation's snare, that had _he_ been tempted in as powerful a degree,
he also might have fallen under the like condemnation.

Without, therefore, appearing to seek Lord Albert's confidence on the
present occasion, Lord Glenmore showed him all the tender sympathy he
entertained for him by a thousand nameless kind attentions; attentions
which rekindled in Lord Albert's breast all his feelings of former
friendship, and a sense of the value of that friend from whom of late
he had been so entirely estranged. Gradually and imperceptibly they
became once more reunited in their habits of intercourse, and Lord
Albert's vacant hours were again devoted to Lord Glenmore's society.
Little did the latter suspect that the time was drawing nigh, when he
himself should require similar support and consolation to that which
he was now affording Lord Albert. But thus it is:--we are all dependent
beings one upon another; and they are wise who, by mutual good offices,
lay up for themselves a store of kindness for the hours of perplexity
and bereavement.

Several weeks had passed away, after Lord Glenmore's express wish for
Lady Glenmore's return, before the latter quitted Paris. This delay
arose not so much from a positive reluctance on her part to return
home, as from that idle habit of living in the momentary excitement
of frivolous pleasures which so much enervate the mind, and deaden
the sense of virtuous affection. Lady Tenderden's character afforded
no antidote to the bane of this growing evil; and Mr. Leslie Winyard,
of course, still bent on the pursuit of Lady Glenmore, used all his
endeavours to retard her stay in Paris as long as possible.

At length, however, the day of their departure came; and when she
arrived in London, she was received in the arms of an affectionate
and too confiding husband. Perhaps, on the first moment's reflection,
brief as these moments were, Lady Glenmore felt in this cordial
reception somewhat of self-reproof that her return had been so long
unnecessarily deferred: but it is one of the concomitant evils of such
a mode of life as hers was, that it is utterly impossible reflection
should have any permanent seat in the mind; so that the natural checks
of conscience, which at intervals will force themselves into view in
hearts not quite hardened, become gradually smothered and suppressed,
till at length they are wholly discarded.

Thus, on the morrow after Lady Glenmore's arrival, the better though
perhaps painful feelings with which she arose were not suffered long
to maintain their ascendancy. The throng of inquirers and friends,
and of _désœuvré_ persons, who flocked around her, soon banished
all reflection. The inquisitive, investigating spirit of a long
morning's _tête-à-tête_ with Lady Tilney, the empty nothingness of Lady
Ellersby's converse; the worldly-mindedness of Lady De Chere, and the
frivolity of all; with a subsequent _soirée_ that closed the scene of
her first recognizance in London; were circumstances well calculated to
turn away Lady Glenmore from any salutary train of thought, which, if
steadily entertained, might have led to a good result. She found even
in Lord Albert's constant presence (for he now almost lived with Lord
Glenmore) a secret satisfaction, a something of the continuation of
that scattering of attention which had become habitual to her during
her last four months' residence on the continent; and the circumstance
of never being alone with her husband in the once happy privacy of
domestic quiet, which some time previously she would have mourned over
and regretted, was now an agreeable relief to her. What a fatal symptom
it is of the state of the affections, when the presence of any third
person is felt to be a relief, in the habitual intercourse of daily
life between man and wife! It is a touchstone by which all married
persons may try the condition of their hearts; and one by whose proof
it is always well to abide, if any lurking evil is found to endanger
happiness.

Although Lady Glenmore might not feel that there was much to hide in
what had passed during her absence, and that many would have called
her conduct, only living as others do who live in the world, yet her
nature, originally, was so amiable and ingenuous, that she still
reserved a place in her breast for that silent monitor which had never
wholly left its station; and it told her that perhaps all that had
been said, and done, and written, and permitted, would not have been
agreeable to her husband. There are a thousand minor occurrences,
which, when considered apart, are _not_ of criminal nature; but which,
when taken together, form a tremendous aggregate of danger, and which
are most certainly detrimental to the purity of married love. If the
sources of the heart are polluted, of what value is the nature of the
virtue that is left?

Lady Glenmore certainly did feel that there were circumstances
attendant on her _séjour_ at Paris and at Spa which she would not
relate to her husband; and she was happy to think Lord Albert's
constant presence afforded a check to any but general allusions on the
subject of her tour. Had Lord Glenmore been unoccupied with public
affairs, or had he _not_ been one whose own uprightness of heart and
conduct shut out all suspicion of others, he might have observed that
something of _gêne_ in Lady Glenmore's manner rendered her different
from what she had been. But, delighted to be once more with his wife;
happy in her presence, and in the joyousness which her renovated health
and beauty diffused around him; and frequently absorbed, besides, in
those cares which abstract a man from many of those minute perceptions
that idle people are alive to, he observed not the alteration in her
manner.

Three days, however, after her return, a case addressed to Lord
Glenmore at his office in Downing-street was forwarded from the
custom-house at Dover. On the box being opened, it was found to
contain a _porte-feuille_ resembling those in which public papers
are transmitted between official personages, and was stamped with
a coronet, and with the initials G. G. The box itself was not
fastened, and was accompanied by a note from one of the heads of
the custom-house, stating, that it had been left at Dover some days
back; and, from all accounts, by one of his lordship's servants
in the hurry of departure, the initials on the box seeming to
authorize the supposition. On the note being handed to Lord Glenmore
by his secretary, he desired him to inspect the contents of the
_porte-feuille_; and when informed that it seemed to contain papers
of a private nature, Lord Glenmore desired to see it himself. He
found it filled with letters addressed to Lady Glenmore, and amongst
others, some which he recognised as being his own; and he was about
to give orders that it should be sent to his house, concluding it was
a mistake, when, on removing some of the letters, and lifting them up
for the purpose of shutting the box, a miniature portrait attracted his
eye. He thought he recognised the features. He paused for a moment,
still gazing at it. At last he exclaimed, "Why! this is surely Leslie
Winyard's portrait! How came it here? This must be a mistake!" Again he
looked at the letters, but there was no mistake. The letters were all
addressed to Lady Glenmore, and some of them were his own.

He involuntarily shuddered. For a moment he half doubted _what_ to do;
whether to close the box, and leave it to Lady Glenmore to explain a
circumstance which appeared so strange, or whether himself to endeavour
to elucidate the mystery by an investigation of the contents. He
hesitated between these two resolves, while his hand mechanically
turned the papers over. In another moment his attention was arrested
by a few brief words beginning, "You will not leave Paris, surely, so
cruelly, so unexpectedly? Remember there are duties of the heart, as
well as those of _convenance_. I rely upon your giving me some days to
prepare for your absence: indeed you owe me this favour;"--and the note
ran on in a similar strain of familiarity, and implied confidence of a
return of sentiment.

To a person of Lord Glenmore's open, unsuspicious nature, the shadow of
such a discovery as seemed now unfolding itself was paralyzing; yet he
was a man of too much strong sense alike to shrink from investigation
when such was necessary, as to act upon any sudden impulse, or form a
hasty conclusion. There was enough, however, in what he had seen, to
make him think deeply, fearfully, and to determine him on probing the
matter at once to its very source.

After a few moments' reflection, his resolution was taken. He knew
that to breathe such a suspicion as these circumstances created of
the woman he loved, even to herself, if she _were_ innocent, would be
the severest wound and deepest degradation that could be inflicted on
her heart; and if she were _not_ innocent, that it would demand more
of calm reflection, than, in the agony of excited feelings, he could
perhaps command, in order to come to any decision. He determined,
therefore, ere he took any further step in the business, to proceed
to an immediate examination of the _porte-feuille_. With every nerve
stretched to agony, and a brain on fire, he removed the papers one by
one, turning over all the letters and notes it contained. He dreaded
to find what he was searching for. Who can express the pain of such a
search? It was some time before he found any character assimilating to
those of the note he had already perused. At length, when he came near
the bottom of the portfolio, the same hand-writing presented itself on
a thousand scraps of paper, and on the direction of various letters.

Again he started, and was obliged for a moment to pause,--his senses
refused their office; but, in another, he rallied; though with that
inward tremor which checks the pulse of life, he turned them over,
and, seizing the first that presented itself, read it with a perfect
knowledge of its contents. The notes and letters were numerous, yet
he missed not one; but continued to read them carefully through with
breathless eagerness, alive to the apprehension of discovering, at
every line of their perusal, something that would inflict a more deadly
wound than he had yet received. When he came to the conclusion, he
literally gasped for breath. "Thank God," he exclaimed, as he dashed a
burning tear from his cheek, "there is nothing positively to criminate
the wife of my bosom!" But to so fond, so noble and faithful a heart
as Lord Glenmore's, was it not sufficient agony to find, that, while
absent from him, her intimacy with another had been of that kind
which could permit of such a correspondence?--a correspondence which
proved that her intercourse with Mr. Leslie Winyard had been of that
nature which sullies the purity of a married woman; and which proved,
likewise, that it had been one of daily habitude, and that not only
had the hours of the day been passed in his presence, but often, by the
dates of the notes, it was evident she must have received them in the
morning before she arose, and at night, after she had retired to rest.
Was this not sufficient to harrow up his soul? Calling, however, to
his aid as much calmness as the circumstances in which he was placed
could admit, he reperused the notes, to avoid all chance of a hasty
or superficial judgment; and again he had the consolation of feeling
certain that they in nowise criminated Lady Glenmore, however much they
proved her guilty of an indiscretion of a most perilous kind.

The letters were the artful compositions of a man of intrigue, such
as he knew Mr. Leslie Winyard to be; and in the intimacy which they
discovered there was a stain on the character of Lady Glenmore,
which, though many degrees removed from positive vice, was still a
degradation to her and to himself. And is there not a pang of long
remorse to follow such a dereliction of duty? And are there not tears
of penitence, wrung from the heart's inmost core, to be shed, which,
though they through mercy wash out sin, cannot wash out shame? And
is there not a something, too, of self-condemnation that pierces
the heart of the husband who can, in the veriest shadow of a shade,
impute to his own neglect, or carelessness, or over-weening security,
his wife's aberrations? Oh! what a world of solemn reflection was now
opened up before Lord Glenmore's view! Bitterly did he repent having
ever suffered a man of such a character as Mr. Leslie Winyard to be on
terms even of acquaintance in his house.

It was not the time, however, to dwell on this irretrievable point;
neither to give way to the suspicions which flashed across him, of
Lady Tenderden's having been, at least, deeply to blame in suffering
the progress of an affair of which she must have been aware, and which
she ought to have arrested in its course by returning home directly.
Neither did he suffer himself to dwell on the reflection, that perhaps
the society into which Lady Glenmore had been thrown in England might
have laid the foundation of her present deviation from propriety. It
was all too late. It was enough, for the present moment, to know, by
the evidence before him, that a fearful evil existed; and he prayed
inwardly that he might already have learned its full extent. He felt
that he could have no surer test how far Lady Glenmore's heart was
involved in the error of her conduct, than by a direct appeal to
herself; for he thought, "It is impossible she could as yet have lost
that ingenuousness, that openness of disposition, which was ever her
peculiar charm! The brief space of a few months cannot have uprooted
virtues which were the growth of years! Should it be,"--and again he
offered up aspirations to Heaven that strength and counsel might be
given him to act for the best under all circumstances, and as in a
Christian spirit he ought to do.

Immediate action, under a sense of mental agony, is less painful than
an inactive endurance; and Lord Glenmore hastened home to sound the
full depth of his misery. Arrived at his house, he found Lady Glenmore
was out. He felt it impossible to meet her any where but under his own
roof and alone, and was therefore determined to await her return. It
was late before she came in; and as she hurried from her carriage, she
gave orders that it should be at the door again in an hour, and was
proceeding hastily to her apartment to change her dress for dinner,
when a servant followed her half way up stairs, saying that Lord
Glenmore had desired to see her ladyship as soon as she entered. "Tell
Lord Glenmore," she replied, in a gay tone of voice, "that I am very
late, and have hardly time to dress. I am going to dine with Lady
Tenderden; but I will see him before I go out. At what time is Lord
Glenmore's carriage ordered? at eight, is it not?"

"I believe so, my lady," was the reply.

"Oh! very well. Then I shall be with him before I go out."

Lord Glenmore, however, had heard his wife's voice; and coming out of
his room he called to her, "Georgina, I must speak with you." There was
something in the tone in which he spoke unlike its usual sound, which
made Lady Glenmore, without waiting to answer, descend immediately to
his room. She entered, and was beginning to state the purport of the
message she had sent to him by the servant, when he said to her, in
the same grave and impressive tone, "Georgina, you cannot leave home
to-day."

"What is the matter?" she exclaimed. "My father! is he ill? or my
mother? What _has_ happened? Has any thing befallen _them_?--For
mercy's sake tell me;"--and she rushed into his arms trembling and in
tears. Lord Glenmore bade her compose herself. "They are well, quite
well," he said; and gently disengaging himself from her, he gazed at
her for a moment in silence, as though he would read her inmost soul;
and then said, "Georgina, have you no other cause for apprehension than
for the safety of your parents?"

"Oh, yes!" she replied wildly, "for yourself;" and again flung herself
into his arms. "Has anything grieved _you_? has any thing befallen you?"

Lord Glenmore was touched by this genuine mark of feeling for himself,
which he knew her too well to think was assumed. He sighed deeply; and
pressing his hand on his breast, unconsciously gave utterance to the
hope which, at the moment, this proof of her affection afforded him,
murmuring audibly, "All may yet be well." Lady Glenmore looked at him
with inquiring eye; when at length, taking from the table the packet
of Leslie Winyard's letters, he opened them before her, asking her if
she knew them, and if they had been addressed to herself. She looked at
them with an expression of surprise; and then mingled shame and dismay
were painted on her countenance, the colour went and came in her cheek,
her lip trembled, and covering her face with her hands, she burst into
an agony of tears.

"Georgina, I adjure you," said her husband in the most solemn tone,
rendered hollow and tremulous by emotion, "I call upon you by all that
is sacred; by your vows, plighted to me at the altar; by the love
which, if all things are not alike deceptive, you have till lately
evinced towards me----."

"Till lately!" she interrupted him, with a gesture and an expression
of the most harrowing agony, "oh! ever, ever!"--and would again have
thrown herself into his arms, but that Lord Glenmore retreated from her
advance, and she fell on her knees with clasped hands before him, and
raising her eyes stedfastly to his, remained in silent supplication,
till Lord Glenmore, evidently as much moved as herself, gently raised
her, and bidding her sit on the sofa by him, said, "You must be calm,
Georgina. I must hear your explanation. I need not ask you if you
felt there was no impropriety, as a married woman, in your receiving
notes of this description: your agitation proves that you feel it was
wrong. But I must first know how you came to admit of any addresses of
the sort; and then I must learn how far your error has proceeded, and
whether your heart is engaged in it."--Lady Glenmore shook her head
in agony of denial.--"And remember, Lady Glenmore," continued Lord
Glenmore, "that whilst the most perfect openness on your part can alone
restore you in time to my affection, so also any deception for the
moment, or any success in imposing on me, must eventually recoil on
yourself, and only hasten your ruin and the entire loss of my heart and
esteem."

Lady Glenmore remained bathed in tears, apparently unable to give
utterance to what was passing in her breast.

"If I understand you right, Georgina, by the gesture which this moment
escaped you, your heart is _not_ engaged in this affair. But how, then,
I ask, could you for a moment suffer any one to assume an intimacy with
you such as these notes testify? Surely it could not be vacancy of
affection, and in default of any object of attachment; for was I not
myself, a few short months before, the husband of your free choice? Or
is it that you are changed indeed?" he added, with a look of inquiring
anxiety.

Again Lady Glenmore shook her head in bitterness of sorrow.

"Tell me, then; how long has this kind of familiarity existed between
you and the writer of these notes? and tell me, is any one aware of
this degrading intimacy?"

"I will tell you all, Glenmore," she exclaimed; "all--all!" Lord
Glenmore shuddered to think how his happiness rested on the awful
revelation of what that all might be. "I will tell you every thing,"
she repeated; and endeavouring to still the sobs that burst from her
heaving bosom, she began.--"That you, Glenmore, should think my heart
engaged to any one but yourself is the deepest pang I feel; and if I
have been guilty, in appearance, of any imprudence or indiscretion, it
is _only in appearance_. In judging me I hope you will be merciful,
though perhaps I cannot ask this at your hands. But if you see fit to
cast me off, and if what I shall say avail me nothing in restoring
me to your affection, still my heart will be yours till it ceases to
beat; and as no one has ever shared it for an instant, so shall no one
_ever_, to my dying hour. _I_ give my heart or my affections to such a
one as Mr. Leslie Winyard?--impossible! I could not if I would. You,
you alone, can ever possess it. But to evince the tenderness which I
feel for you in public, I was told was wrong, was ridiculous; and I was
taught to think that you yourself would cease to love me if I troubled
you with demonstrations of this fondness. I was told, also, that
another than you ought to be my attendant in the world; and the example
of those around me confirmed in this idea." Lord Glenmore sighed
heavily as he felt the truth of what last fell from Lady Glenmore.

"Who _could_ have told you this?" he uttered involuntarily.

"Glenmore, did you not yourself tell me that I must look to the conduct
of those with whom I lived as the best guide for my own? did you not
tell me that Lady Tenderden would be my best model? And if I have
displeased you in my late conduct, think how much I have been led into
the error by your own directions?"

"Georgina, your heart must tell you, that I could never intend, by any
suggestions on my part, that you should form an _intimacy_ with such
a person as Mr. Leslie Winyard, at least such an intimacy as you seem
to have done by these notes. It is true I might have bid you lay aside
the foolish expectation that I should be ever at your side in public;
but I could never judge so ill of your understanding, as to suppose
that such expressions, on my part, could be interpreted to the extent
of endangering your honour and my happiness. But proceed. You have not
yet told me how this intimacy has grown, or what encouragement you have
given to justify such insolent presumption."

"Indeed, indeed, Glenmore, I can hardly tell you how. But first,
whenever I _was_ in public, you were always absent; or, if not absent,
at least occupied with others and not with myself. I sat alone,
_ennuyé_, and with a feeling of desertion. At the _écarté_ parties,
especially, I felt desolate. To them, you know, no young, unmarried
ladies were admitted; and the persons who composed the society were
either engaged in play, or else those who sat out were so engaged,
two and two, in conversation at distant parts of the room, that I
felt awkward in attempting to join them. Oh! how I have sat, night
after night, in those fine rooms, thinking how little they afforded
happiness, and wishing myself any where else! The first person who paid
me any attention was Mr. Leslie Winyard. I found him agreeable and
entertaining; and neither saw nor heard, in his manner or conversation,
any thing that the whole world might not have seen or heard with me.
If others spoke to me, it was a matter of form, or only a passing
word, without seeming to care whether I answered or not; while he,
on the contrary, always listened to what I had to say with apparent
interest,--always seemed impressed with a wish to please me whenever
we met; and thus our intimacy commenced. Deprived of you, Glenmore, I
thought there was no harm in amusing myself in public during the time
that I was there; instead of being quite _délaissée_. _You_ know how
unwilling I was to enter on a life of dissipation." Lord Glenmore again
sighed, as if in assent to the truth of these words; and blamed himself
inwardly that he had ever suffered Lady Glenmore to mingle, unprotected
by himself, in society which now, for the first time, appeared to him,
in its full force, to be of such dangerous tendency, that he felt he
ought to have known better.

"But your greater intimacy abroad," he went on to ask, "Georgina? for
it was abroad that these notes seem to have been written. Did you
receive none such before your departure?"

"None, on my sacred word," she replied.

"Then how came you to admit them?"

"Oh! I can scarcely tell. Sometimes we were left in doubt, the evening
before, whether our party was to take place on the following day or
not, and he wrote to me to know _how_ it was to be. Then I sometimes
returned fatigued with our day's excursion, and a note of inquiry would
arrive. Then another morning would come flowers, another music, and
with all these came notes."

"Did you ever answer them?"

"Very seldom, for you know I hate writing; and when I did it was only a
literal word of reply to some question about the hour at which we were
to ride or dine out. The notes themselves will tell you this, Glenmore,
for they complain of never being answered."

"But if you did not answer, you valued them, Georgina, or you would not
have preserved them."

"Yes," she replied, "I liked the attention they proved; but that was
all. _I_ meant no harm; and though Lady Tenderden frequently knew of
the circumstance, she never reproved me for receiving them."

"Did Lady Tenderden," exclaimed Lord Glenmore with surprise, "never
tell you you were in the wrong, or, at least, imprudent?"

"No--no," Lady Glenmore answered with some hesitation, and as if
endeavouring to recollect herself.

"You hesitate, Georgina. Did Lady Tenderden, I ask you pointedly, never
make any remark on Mr. Leslie Winyard's attentions to you?"

"Yes, yes; once she did say something."

"What was it?" asked Lord Glenmore, with breathless impatience.

"She told me that I should not encourage Mr. Leslie Winyard _alone_;
that it was bad taste to have but one cavalier; that he would grow
tired of me if I did not divide my preference."

"Gracious heaven!" exclaimed Lord Glenmore, striking his hands
together; "and is it to this guardianship that I have intrusted
you?--But the picture, Georgina, the picture! tell me, how came the
picture of that man in your possession?"

"His picture!" repeated Lady Glenmore with surprise.

"Yes," rejoined Lord Glenmore sternly; and taking it from beneath the
papers, pointed to it.

"Oh! I remember now; I had totally forgotten it. But one day, when I
was writing, he came up to me. We had been talking, the evening before,
of remembering people and their features in absence, and I had declared
my inability to recall any one, however intimate, to my memory, when I
did not see them; and then he said he could not bear me to forget him,
and he would put his portrait in my _porte-feuille_, which I conclude
he did; but indeed, indeed I have never looked at it or thought of it
since;"--and she raised her eloquent eyes, streaming with tears, full
in Lord Glenmore's face.

The latter, during the whole of what had passed, felt that his wife was
only the victim of the system of that society in which she had been
cast. He could not for a moment believe that the expression of that
genuine feeling which had been displayed could have been assumed,--that
the undisguised truth had not been elicited in every word that had
fallen from Lady Glenmore's lips,--that she had been led away by the
vanity of a designing man's attention, and during a season, _perhaps_,
of neglect on his part.

How could he then, if his honour and her heart were still unpolluted,
deal harshly by her? Lord Glenmore's views, on all subjects, were
clear and decided; and from what he had elicited from Lady Glenmore,
his purpose was fixed, provided she answered him satisfactorily on two
points, and with the same ingenuous spirit, and the same conviction.
Turning to her, therefore, with much solemnity, he said,

"Georgina, you have been foolish: I believe this to be the extent
of your error. I, perhaps, have been unwise in trusting too much to
your discretion. But before I can again repose confidence in you, you
must first assure me, in the most solemn manner, that you have told
me _all_,--that you have concealed no part of this transaction from
me:--you must swear it."

"I swear," exclaimed Lady Glenmore; and falling on her knees, once more
raised her hands and eyes to heaven, in affirmation of her words, and
in agony of feeling.

Lord Glenmore was deeply agitated. "And then," he continued, his voice
faltering with emotion, "you must promise me that you will break off
all intercourse and acquaintance with that man."

"All, all!" she cried, embracing his knees; "joyfully I will break it
off," and raising an imploring look of love up to his face.

"Voluntarily, freely," he continued, as he gazed at her.

"Yes, Glenmore," she repeated, with deep earnestness. "What is he or
his hated name to me, if you but love me? Only trust me, try me, and
you will find how devotedly I am your own."

Lord Glenmore was deeply affected; and as she clung to his knees,
raised her in his arms, and pressed her convulsively to his heart.

"_I will trust you, Georgina_," he said, as he impressed a kiss on her
forehead--the seal of peace; nor was it impressed in vain. "And now,"
he added, "you require repose. This has been a deep lesson to you and
to myself. Go to your chamber, Georgina, and thank God, as I do, that
you have been thus saved from degradation and misery." Again Lady
Glenmore flinging herself into those dear arms which no longer repelled
her embrace, wept for some moments on his neck delicious tears of
penitence and love.

Once more alone, Lord Glenmore reviewed all that had passed; and in
the calm reflection of a strong mind saw at once the miserable cause,
and the nearly fatal effects, of a mode of life, the awful dangers
of which he had never till then questioned. He had the honesty to
perceive in his own conduct much more to blame than in that of his
young and inexperienced wife. His belief amounted to conviction of her
innocence, even in regard to the imprudence into which she had been
betrayed. A thousand times did he condemn his own mistaken course, and
his too confiding nature, as the cause of all that had occurred. A
thousand instances did he recall of his having placed Lady Glenmore in
circumstances where a less virtuous nature than hers would have fallen
a more easy sacrifice.

The delusion of the false system of society in which she had been
cast was now unveiled, and a thousand proofs of the immorality and
viciousness which marked the course of those with whom he had
habitually lived now stared him in the face; and with a deep feeling
of gratitude he raised the voice of thanksgiving to Heaven, that the
mist of error had been dispelled in time to save her who was dearer to
him than his own life, and in whose happiness his own was involved. How
to break from the entanglements of a society which had produced these
baneful results was a reflection of difficulty.

Lord Glenmore was too much a man of the world, and too good and just
a person, to act hastily in such circumstances; for he well knew that
to do so would be only to draw down upon himself and his wife the
animadversions of the world at large, and the rancour of those from
whom he separated; and in this his wife's character must suffer. It
required, therefore, the calmness of repose, and the deliberation of a
less agitated mind, to decide on the after-measures to be taken; and
with the determination of adopting such as might appear best suited to
the circumstances of the case, he retired, at length, to rest.




CHAPTER XIII.

FINAL DEVELOPMENT OF A DANGEROUS SYSTEM.


Whatever confidence Lord Glenmore felt in possessing the full and
undivided affections of Lady Glenmore, yet the particulars of such a
disclosure as had come to light, of her intimacy with Leslie Winyard,
could not fail, for a long period, to throw a gloom on his existence;
and gave birth to a feeling, that the happiness which he had hitherto
contemplated as unclouded was now obscured by some of those shades
which are incident to all human enjoyments, and which are wisely
ordered to wean us, perhaps, from a world we might otherwise love too
well.

Convinced, however, that Lady Glenmore had been timely saved from
falling a prey to circumstances arising out of the nature of the
society into which she was thrown, and which he could not help
considering were in a great measure the result of his own want of
forethought and care, he felt assured that the decision he had come to
was as much his _duty_, as his heart told him it was his _desire_.

To withdraw Lady Glenmore from that circle was nevertheless no easy
task. Habits of conventional dissipation are seldom broken through
without producing a mutual aversion between the parties. From this
feeling, on the part of her former associates, it was his anxious wish
to guard Lady Glenmore; for he felt that to a young and inexperienced
heart there can be no greater temptation to return to error, than to
be exposed to those sneers and contemptuous remarks which the world of
folly is ever ready to apply when it finds itself tacitly reproved.

While, therefore, Lady Glenmore remained exposed, as she must of
necessity be for a season, to the casual society of Lady Tenderden,
Lady Tilney, and the rest of that party, it would have been impolitic,
with the views Lord Glenmore entertained, for him to have adopted any
very marked change in his own or Lady Glenmore's outward deportment
towards them. But he laid a sure and better foundation of future
propriety in the conduct of his wife, by developing to her the dangers
and awful consequences which, now that his fears had been timely
awakened, he saw existed in the mode of life and peculiar society in
which they had hitherto taken a part.

Struck with dismay at the contemplation of the picture he drew, and
while there was no reason to appeal further than to her own good sense,
Lord Glenmore felt convinced that the veil had been seasonably removed
from _her_ eyes as well as _his own_; and that, with a conviction of
the danger which surrounded her, and with affections firmly fixed upon
himself, he might discard all fear for the future on _her_ account.
In regard to her acquaintance, however, with Mr. Leslie Winyard, a
more decided line was necessarily taken; and although this step gave
rise to some whispers among the younger and more licentious part of
the society, and elicited innuendos from Leslie Winyard himself, under
which, with real baseness, he sought to conceal the mortification of
his abrupt dismissal, yet the more prudent of the _coterie_ rejoiced in
the circumstance, as averting the danger of a _public scandal_ which
threatened them.

Amongst this number Lady Tilney was loud in dwelling on the fortunate
_dénouement_ of an affair which, had it terminated otherwise, might
have been detrimental to the interests of the circle in which she
reigned; and arrogated to herself the whole merit of having, by her
good policy, been the means of bringing it to this conclusion:--a false
and unhallowed presumption, thus to attribute to human agency alone,
and human foresight, events which proceed from a higher source than
this world's wisdom can reach! but which is too common an error in
minds where religion is not the abiding principle.

Neither Lady Tilney, however, nor any of the _coterie_, were aware of
the determination of Lord and Lady Glenmore to withdraw themselves
ultimately from their circle; an event which movements in the political
world, as unexpected as they were generally deprecated, greatly
facilitated, and of which Lord Glenmore failed not to take advantage,
as much for the sake of his domestic peace, as for the maintenance
of his political principles. Measures which he felt he never could
consistently support were on the point of being brought forward by the
head of the ministry; and with that frankness and decision of character
which had marked his whole life, he sought permission to retire from
public affairs, and resign the office which he held.

Aware of the importance of his support, the minister of the day long
sought to retain him on his side; but no arguments of expediency
could overcome the fixed principles of right and wrong by which Lord
Glenmore was actuated; and he finally succeeded in liberating himself
from the toils of an office which, since the late threatened overthrow
of his domestic peace, he had found induced too great a sacrifice
of more essential points of happiness. Equally rejoiced with Lord
Glenmore was Lord Albert D'Esterre at this event, for in the present
state of his mind he found mixing in public, which his official
situation imposed upon him, a most irksome burden; and he hailed with
satisfaction a circumstance which, as a natural consequence of Lord
Glenmore's resignation, freed him also from the toils of office. The
first favourable result that accrued from this change was, that it
threw Lord Glenmore and Lord Albert more together; who, in the leisure
of retirement, experienced the sweets of that steady friendship which
is the offspring of mutual esteem.

In a proposal which, soon after these occurrences, Lord Glenmore made
to Lord Albert, of taking advantage of their liberation to go abroad,
the latter readily joined; not only as being his friend's wish but also
as one in which he would have sooner indulged himself, except for the
pain he endured at the thought of quitting Lord Glenmore. All barriers
to his wishes in this respect being removed, the arrangements for a
foreign tour were soon completed; and leaving the _coterie_ astonished
at the _mauvais ton_ of their quitting London in the middle of _the
season_, and when no one was at Paris, and no inducement could exist
for a _séjour_ abroad, according to their calculation, Lord Glenmore
and Lord Albert were soon consigned to oblivion, and ceased to be
subjects of conversation.

They, on their part, quitted London without one of those regrets so
generally experienced by the young and gay when bidding adieu to so
many seducing phantoms of pleasure--phantoms, however, whose fallacy
they had too deeply proved, ever to permit a moment's power over them
in future.

The reunited friends pursued their journey in the same route; and
although Lord Albert's heart was any thing but light, a degree of
serenity was gradually restored to him in the calm of reflection,
the interest of the scenes he passed through, and above all in that
reflected ray of happiness which he caught from his friend.

A year in this manner had passed away, and Lord Glenmore had recovered
that even cheerfulness which is a test of the heart's happiness, and
which the assurance of Lady Glenmore's devotedness to himself, and
total abandonment of all wish to re-enter scenes from which he had
withdrawn her, were calculated to restore. It was at this period that
the party found themselves at Naples: and here Lord Albert's proximity
to that country of classic name which he had once before visited,
and which again seemed to call him to the contemplation of all the
interests and beauties which it ever retains, together with that spirit
of restlessness, which is the concomitant of an unoccupied heart,
tempted him once more to revisit Greece.

In fulfilling this wish, however, he remained some time undecided,
from his averseness to quit the Glenmores; but when Lady Glenmore's
health at length prevented the possibility of their removing from
Naples, he decided on resigning the society of his friends for a few
months, and prepared for his departure. However lively his regret at
the moment of separation, and however irksome his absence, from Lord
Glenmore might appear, Lord Albert's stay in Greece was prolonged far
beyond his original intention; for who, once having tasted the delights
attendant on Grecian travel, can readily forego the charm it affords?
If there is earthly balm for a wounded spirit, it is in the feelings
and reflections which such scenes inspire.

In the correspondence that continued between Lord Glenmore and Lord
Albert D'Esterre, he found the former had quitted Italy, and intended
to pass the winter in Munich. When, therefore, his own affairs called
him imperatively back to England, he took his route through Germany;
and arriving late at Munich, stopped there for the night, in order to
enjoy a few hours society with the only persons who still, he believed,
were solicitous to retain his friendship. The announcement of his
arrival was quickly followed by his presence at the hotel inhabited by
Lord Glenmore. The meeting and reception were such as may be imagined,
though seldom realized, between friends so cordially united; and if it
suffered any alloy, it was the contrasted loneliness of Lord Albert's
heart with the domestic felicity of Lord Glenmore. But although he felt
the pang of self-regret, he was not insensible to the reflected joy of
Lord Glenmore's happiness.

His transient visit was soon followed by the declaration of his
intended departure on the morrow. But who can tell what a day may
bring forth? From this intention he was eagerly dissuaded by the
joint entreaties of Lord and Lady Glenmore; and yielding to their
solicitations, and the prospect of the pleasure of their society,
rather than to the inducement they held out of a court festival that
was to take place the following day, he gave a reluctant acquiescence
to retard his journey, and promised his attendance at the Court.

On the morrow, Lord Albert arrived at the palace, but late; and was
obliged to hurry through the apartments, in order to be in time for
his presentation. This formality gone through, he was leisurely
retracing his way to rejoin the Glenmores, who stood in a distant part
of the circle, when his eyes were attracted to a form which he thought
he recognised, but so changed, so pale, so much taller than he had
been used to recollect as the image of the person whom the features
represented, that he stopped for a moment in doubt. But that moment
was sufficient to make him remember all. It was Lady Adeline Seymour
who stood before him. For a moment he paused, and was irresolute how
to act. His head swam round, and every object in the room became one
confused mass. He looked for a way to escape; but escape there was
none, without causing much observation, the circle was so closely
drawn; and he found he must inevitably proceed in the direction where
this magic phantom stood. He endeavoured to arm himself for the dreaded
trial; but with every nerve trembling, and every pulse beating, he
was forced to move on. He endeavoured to fix his eyes on the ground,
but, in despite of himself, they were constantly raised to the object
that so irresistibly attracted them. As he drew nearer, he observed
Lady Dunmelraise leaning on the arm of her daughter. Again he started,
and gasped with uncontrollable emotion. The Court was breaking up.
The current of the throng set in one way, and pressed upon him till
he found himself absolutely borne close to the very beings whom,
of all others, it caused him the most violent agitation of mingled
feelings to meet. "Lord Albert D'Esterre" exclaimed Lady Dunmelraise,
and, courtesying, she half smiled as she recognised him. He bowed
in silence, unable to speak. Lady Dunmelraise continued to address
him:--"Have you been long at Munich, Lord Albert?" "Yes--no--yes--no. I
have been"----and he murmured a few incoherent words that admitted of
any interpretation, but which she did not misunderstand.

"Adeline, dear!" she said, turning to her daughter, whose head had
drooped, and whose eyes sought the ground, "Adeline! do you not
recognise Lord Albert D'Esterre?" Lady Adeline bowed without speaking,
or raising her head. She was powerless. Lord Albert's eyes were
fixed in stupified amazement on her. The crowd had now congregated
around them, and it was impossible for either party to move. Painful
as this situation was, Lord Albert thought he read, in the tremor
of Lady Adeline's frame, a something indefinable indeed, but which,
nevertheless, breathed of tender reminiscence. In another minute, the
glove and fan which she held in her hand dropped from her trembling
hold.

Lord Albert hastened to recover them; and, in presenting them to her,
the whole recollection of the scene at the Court of London flashed
vividly on his mind: the myrtle sprig, the look that had accompanied
the bequest of it to him, all returned to _his_ remembrance; and had
it faded entirely from hers? He ventured not to speak; but in this act
of common courtesy, while holding the fan by one end as she touched
it at the other, there was a mutually tremulous vibration that passed
through it, which told him of _all that was thrilling_ in her heart at
the moment, and which instinctively conveyed to him a renovated gleam
of hope. Under these feelings, Lord Albert, in his turn, stooped his
head to hide the tear that started to his eye, as he acknowledged--for
how could he do otherwise than acknowledge?--that _this_ was not the
feeling of one indifferent to him.

It needed, however, only a moment's reflection to repress the
presumptuous joy which for an instant filled his breast; and, with
wounds fresh opened, he sought the opportunity which a movement in the
crowd afforded him to rush from the palace to his carriage. Thence he
drove impetuously to his hotel, called his servants, gave orders for
instant preparations for departure, and hastily changing his dress, and
desiring his carriage to attend him at Lord Glenmore's hotel, proceeded
thither.

He entered with excited feelings, and a spirit irritated by the most
contradictory emotions, and half-inclined to reproach Lord Glenmore
for having exposed him to the painful scene which he had just passed
through. Lord Albert met him on the staircase, that moment returned
from Court. Lord Glenmore looked at him at first with astonishment, and
then at his change of dress.

"Glenmore," said Lord Albert in a hurried tone, "I must speak to
you;"--and as they entered his apartment, he continued, in agitation:

"Why have you exposed me to this scene? Why did you not tell me that
she was here? I have met Adeline;"--and he sunk into a chair, unable to
utter more.

"My dear D'Esterre," Lord Glenmore replied, "forgive me. You must know
how far it is from any wish of my heart to pain or agitate yours.
That you should have met Lady Adeline under circumstances distressing
to your feelings, you may believe I deeply lament: that I knew she was
resident here, it could never be my intention to conceal from you: but
that your meeting will be ultimately productive of mutual happiness to
you both (however agonizing at the moment), I cannot for an instant
doubt." Lord Albert paced the room in agitation.

"Hear me; only hear me, D'Esterre, for a few moments." Lord Albert
again cast himself into a seat.

"Let me tell you, then, quietly, that since we parted, and particularly
since our residence in this place, Lady Adeline has become the intimate
friend of my wife. Her secret thoughts have been revealed to Georgina.
Need I tell what these thoughts are? They reveal an attachment the
truest and most refined that ever warmed a heart, and that heart is
wholly and unchangeably your own. Was it possible, D'Esterre, that,
knowing you as I do, I should allow what I believe to be the truth to
remain secret, and not inform my wife that your affections were in
reality centred in Lady Adeline? And again, as your friend, knowing,
or, at least, surmising, all those unfortunate circumstances which
had arisen to separate you, that I should not endeavour to clear up
the misapprehension, and remedy the evil? Was it, too, possible, would
it have been the part of a real friend, had I deferred for an instant
seeking to place every thing in its true light to Lady Dunmelraise?
I should, indeed, have been unworthy of the character, if, from a
momentary fear of your displeasure, I had forborne to do so. This I
have done, D'Esterre;"--and Lord Glenmore added, half smiling, and
extending his hand to him as he spoke, "and for this, as well as for
the meeting that has just taken place, I feel you cannot _blame_ me."

"You are all goodness," exclaimed Lord Albert mournfully. "But what
then?" he cried with gasping eagerness, "what can it all avail me?"

"What then! why this, D'Esterre--the crowning of your wishes, the
fulfilment of your happiness. I found Lady Dunmelraise almost as much
enlightened as to the circumstances which broke off your engagement
with Lady Adeline as myself; and, in avowing this knowledge, she
accompanied it with expressions of regret that she had not herself been
more explicit on the subject to you.

"With this understanding of Lady Dunmelraise's sentiments, and the
conviction of Lady Adeline's affections being wholly yours, have I
acted wrong, even in apparent violation of your feelings, in bringing
about this interview? After all, the first meeting has been, perhaps,
as little trying to both as could well be; and it has, with this
explanation, I hope, opened the way to a more delightful reverie still.
D'Esterre, I adjure you by our friendship, by your own happiness,
trust to me, trust to Georgina, and suffer not this fortunate moment
to escape! Give way to the genuine impulse of your heart. Let not any
false pride, any untimely fears, influence you; but empower me, this
very instant, to go to Lady Dunmelraise, and prepare the way for your
reception."

Lord Albert D'Esterre, with a sense of happiness too overpowering to
admit of any distinct feeling, yielded up all the latent prejudices
and pride of his nature, which Lady Dunmelraise's rejection still left
rankling in his bosom; and, overcome by the tender entreaties of Lord
Glenmore, he at last convulsively exclaimed,

"Go, go, Glenmore! but do not deceive me; do not place me in any
position unworthy of your friend." Lord Glenmore waited not an instant,
but flew to Lady Dunmelraise, the happy messenger of happy tidings.
The purpose of his mission was soon made known, and as soon acceded to;
and when Lord Albert, the victim of delusion, found himself once more
in Lady Dunmelraise's presence, the cordial pressure of the hand, the
expressions of pleasure at again meeting, the tearful eye, and soft
intonation of voice, soon assured him that all the justice that could
be done him had already taken effect in Lady Dunmelraise's mind; and
the half-broken, half-murmured sentences which he attempted in reply
were interrupted by the latter calling to Lady Adeline Seymour from the
adjoining room. As she came forward with downcast looks and trembling
footstep, Lord Albert hastened towards her, took her hands in his, and
as he pressed them to his lips, asked her "if she could forgive him?"

In sounds almost inarticulate, she pronounced his name; and as her
head was bowed down, overcome with the agitation of such a moment,
Lady Dunmelraise approached, pressed their united hands together, and
blessed them as her children.

With what inebriation of happiness did Lord Albert quit this scene!
with what a cheered and gladdened spirit did he return to Lord
Glenmore! with what an overflowing spirit of thankfulness did he pour
forth his acknowledgments to the friend who, under Providence, had
restored him to happiness, and with such judicious zeal guided and
counselled him to reach the goal!--For these feelings there are no
words. To Lady Glenmore also he opened his whole soul, and condemned
repeatedly his misapprehension of Adeline's conduct, and his own want
of candour; while he listened with rapturous delight to every fresh
proof which fell from Lady Glenmore's lips, of Lady Adeline's love;
though even in this, there was an anguish mingled with the joy, to
think how little he had merited the devotion of such a heart. After
some hours had passed, during which Lord Albert, in the delirium of his
felicity, scarcely could persuade himself of the reality of a change
which so short a time had wrought in his existence, he became calmer;
and looking back on the past, he could not but see the over-ruling hand
of Providence in all that had befallen him.

The unthinking might call it a chance, which had opened up to him
the real character of Lady Hamlet Vernon; and, in the same mistaken
levity, might have attributed to the same blind accident the serious
reflections which this discovery brought in its train: and continuing
in this error, they might ascribe to the same fortuitous power, that he
had reached Munich, a desolate and forlorn being, to whom no object
in life presented itself to cheer existence or stimulate exertion; and
that, now, how the evolution of a few hours had reversed the whole
picture, and placed him on the summit of human happiness!--Yes, the
unthinking and the hardened may ascribe all this to chance: but the
wise and good know that _chance_ is only another word for Providence;
and that in every turn of our lives, in every minutia which affects
our existence here or hereafter, there is a mightier power to be
acknowledged than any secondary cause can alone produce.

"D'Esterre," said Lord Glenmore, as the latter entered the apartment
where he was sitting with Lady Glenmore, "D'Esterre, do you know that
your carriage has been waiting for hours at the door?" and smiling as
he added, "I presume it may go back to your hotel, for I have to tell
you that Lady Dunmelraise and Lady Adeline will be here directly." Lord
Albert looked his delighted thanks. "And if you intend to make any
toilette for dinner," continued the former, "there is no time to lose."
Lord Albert arose, pressed the hands of both his friends to his heart,
and promised to return instantly.

As he descended the staircase, he saw his old servant Comtois, who
held his travelling cloak. Lord Albert said, as he passed him, "No,
Comtois, no." The former made a sign to the courier to mount. Lord
Albert observed this, and turning round, added, "Comtois, I shall not
set off to-day."

"No, _milor_?" rejoined the latter with surprise, his features catching
a portion of the joy that gleamed from his master's face, and to which
such an expression had long been a stranger. "_Milor, donc, a changé
d'intention: il ne part pas._"

"No, Comtois; and I must dress as soon as possible, so go to my hotel."
The servant hastened forward to execute these orders, with as much
alacrity as Lord Albert had shown in giving them; and the grave tone
of command to the courier to return with the carriage was changed to
one almost of friendly familiarity, as he said, nodding to him, "Luigi,
_nous ne partons pas_. _Vite à l'hôtel._"

It would be vain to attempt to describe all that passed, all that was
said and looked, when they met, between the now happy Lord Albert and
Lady Adeline. Much time at Munich was not suffered to elapse, before
arrangements were made for Lady Dunmelraise's and her daughter's return
to England, whither they were accompanied by Lord Albert; and when
arrived there, their union was to take place as soon as possible. Lord
and Lady Glenmore were entreated to return in time for the ceremony;
and the former, re-assured by the two years' devotion and increasing
attachment of his wife, now saw no reason for his prolonged stay on the
continent.

Lord Albert D'Esterre, on his arrival in England, found some little
difficulty in explaining satisfactorily to his father Lord Tresyllian's
mind all the contradictory circumstances which had led to Lady
Adeline's rejection of him, and in regaining his approbation of their
union; but the wounded pride of the latter was at length appeased by
the most satisfactory details of all the occurrences, and beyond this
Lord Tresyllian had little feeling. The marriage took place a few
days after the arrival of the Glenmores, and for nine days formed the
subject of wonder and conversation in the _coterie_ of the exclusives,
in which Lord Albert had so nearly made a wreck of happiness.

With this circle, a few excepted, no renewal of intimacy took place,
either on the part of Lord Albert or Lord Glenmore. They found, by
public report, that the fate of some who had figured in it had been
such as their course must sooner or later have brought them to.
Mr. Leslie Winyard had married, a few months after Lady Glenmore's
departure, an heiress of immense wealth; who, dazzled with the idea
of obtaining the _entrée_ into that circle of _ton_ in which he moved,
and betrayed by the delusive hope of reclaiming him from its more
destructive follies by her love and devotion, had given him her hand,
her fortune, and her happiness. Enormous, however, as was her wealth,
it was soon dissipated in the payment of his previous debts, and the
endless extravagances into which he plunged: and in eighteen months
after their union she had died of a broken heart; having lived to
witness the foul desertion of the man for whom she had sacrificed every
thing, and who was then living, in open violation of all religious and
moral feeling, with a recent victim of his seduction.

Lady Glenmore shuddered as she heard these details, and lifted up her
hands in silent thanksgiving to the Almighty for having been preserved
from so awful a fate. As regarded Lord Albert, if any thing could have
been requisite to confirm him in the proper estimate he had formed
of Lady Hamlet Vernon's character, and the danger he had escaped, he
would have found it in _her_ subsequent history; for, pursuing the
same course of intrigue in which she had so nearly involved him, she
at length fell into the toils spread for others, and became the dupe
of her own vicious folly. Brought to a situation in which the fruits
of her conduct would soon become glaringly apparent, and which, if
discovered, must have driven her from that circle where every thing
depended on avoiding _detection_, and scorned by the man she had sought
to inveigle, she was obliged, as a last resource, to veil her infamy
by a marriage with Mr. Foley, with whom she lived at present on those
terms of mutual unhappiness which would naturally be the consequence of
such a union.

Some few there were of the _coterie_, who had been timely warned, and,
seeing the tendency of the course they were pursuing, had withdrawn
from the magic sphere to better and more stable pursuits. Among
these was Lord Gascoigne, whose quick intelligence and clear head,
accompanied by a goodness of heart which he often concealed under a
show of levity, had preserved him from losing himself entirely in
the vortex of folly. Lord and Lady Baskerville, too, had seen their
error--an error more of the head arising from the contamination of
example, than of the heart; and who now lived as became their station,
and in the way which bade a fair promise for virtuous happiness; while
others of the number continued their heartless round, without coming
to any open disgrace, and yet without making any reform. Among these,
again, was Lady Tilney, who continued still the _soi-disant_ queen
of _ton_, blind to the approach of that period when her empire must
yield, in despite of all her strenuous efforts to uphold it, to that of
some fresh rising beauty; and still insensible to the dreadful vacuum
which in the decline of life, without the sincerity of friendship and
the resources of a well-cultivated mind--above all, without religious
trust to cheer and gild the setting sun of life--must be the miserable
portion of every human creature.

One _distingué_ member of the _coterie_ was on the eve of leaving it
and the country, not willingly, but from imperative circumstances. The
Comtesse Leinsengen, who had for years played the part of a crafty
_diplomatiste_ with the government, as well as endeavoured to extend
her rule over the circles of fashion, had found herself at last foiled
in her political objects: and too proud to bear this defeat, she had
announced her departure as decisive; an event that to the minister
afforded a feeling of triumph, and no less of secret joy in the breast
of Lady Tilney, who had found in her "_dear friend_" her most dreaded
rival and pertinacious opponent. Oh! what a melancholy reflection to
think, if the Comtesse Leinsengen ever did think on any thing beyond
views of self-interest and the gratification of self-love, that an
intimacy with those with whom she had lived for so many years had been
productive of no one friendship that deserved the name, and given birth
to no one regret when she was about to leave them probably for ever!

Such, however, would be found to be the case with almost every
individual forming part of this circle, where selfishness,
heartlessness, and cold over-reaching, alternately swayed every action;
passions which, when delineated, at some future day, as they appear
exemplified in individual characters on the scene, will give additional
strength to the moral lesson intended to be conveyed by this general
view of EXCLUSIVE SOCIETY.


THE END.


LONDON: PRINTED BY THOMAS DAVISON, WHITEFRIARS.




INTERESTING WORKS JUST PUBLISHED, BY HENRY COLBURN AND RICHARD BENTLEY,
NEW BURLINGTON-STREET.


  The BOOK of the BOUDOIR. By LADY MORGAN. 2 vols.

  The NEW FOREST, a Novel. By the author of "Brambletye
  House." 3 vols.

  DEVEREUX. By the author of "Pelham," and "The
  Disowned." 3 vols.

  The SCHOOL of FASHION. 3 vols.

"A true index to the tastes and feelings of the great world. The author
is known to be a person of high rank, and this is a circumstance to
which some weight is really due, when a book professes to depict the
lives and manners of the aristocracy. But in this instance the author
is more than merely a person of high rank: it is impossible to read her
book without acknowledging that she is also a person of lively talents
and quick observation, with a keen sense of the ridiculous, united by
rather a rare combination with clear sound sense and perspicacity of
judgment."--_Courier._


 TALES of an INDIAN CAMP. In 3 vols. post 8vo. 31_s._ 6_d._

 TALES of MY TIME. By the author of "Blue Stocking Hall." In 3 vols.
 post 8vo.

 STORIES of WATERLOO.--CONTENTS: Waterloo--The Field of Battle--The
 Seventeenth of June--Quatre Bras--Ligny--Brussels--The Dead
 Dragoon--Napoleon and his Army--The Captain of Grenadiers--The
 Detachment--The Route--The Outlaw's Story--The March--Story of Colonel
 Hilson--Sarsfield--Maurice Mac Carthy--The Champ de Mai--Belgium--The
 Cavalry Picket--Napoleon's Return, &c. &c. In 3 vols. post 8vo. 28_s._
 6_d._

 The CHELSEA PENSIONERS. By the author of the "Subaltern."
 3 vols.--CONTENTS: The Gentle Recruit--A Day on Neutral
 Ground--Saratoga--Maida--A Pyrenean Adventure--The Rivals.




_Works published by Colburn and Bentley._


  1. STORIES of a BRIDE. By the Authoress of "The Mummy." 3 vols.

  2. THE BORDERERS. An AMERICAN TALE. By the Author of "The Prairie,"
     "The Red Rover," &c.

  3. THE KING'S PAGE. A Novel. 3 vols.

  4. THE DAVENELS: or, A CAMPAIGN OF FASHION IN DUBLIN. 2 vols. 18s.

  5. OLD COURT, a Novel. 3 vols.

     "This Romance is the work of a very able pen."--_Court Journal._

  6. RICHELIEU, A TALE OF THE COURT OF FRANCE. 3 vols.

     "A very superior work, and one well calculated for extensive
     popularity."--_Literary Gazette._

  7. ECARTÉ; or, the SALONS OF PARIS. 3 vols. 28s. 6d.

  8. THE NAVAL OFFICER; or, SCENES and ADVENTURES in the LIFE OF FRANK
     MILDMAY. 3 vols.

  9. WALDEGRAVE. A TALE of the SOUTH. 3 vols. 27s.

 10. RYBRENT de CRUCE. 3 vols. 28s. 6d.

     "The production of an intelligent and cultivated person."--_New
     Monthly Magazine._

     "This is a very clever novel."--_Literary Gazette._

 11. GERALDINE of DESMOND; or, IRELAND in the REIGN of ELIZABETH. 3
     vols.

     "The work will take its station among the best historical romances
     that have ever been written."--_Cheltenham Chronicle._

 12. BLUE STOCKING HALL. Second Edition. 3 vols. 27s.

 13. TALES of a VOYAGER to the ARCTIC OCEAN. SECOND SERIES. 3 vols.

 14. THE CARBONARO. A TALE, by the DUKE DE LEVIS. 2 vols.

 15. THE SECTARIAN; or, The CHURCH and the MEETING-HOUSE. 3 vols.

 16. TALES of WOMAN, Illustrative of the FEMALE CHARACTER. 2 vols.

 17. THE MAN of TWO LIVES. A NARRATIVE, WRITTEN by HIMSELF. 2 vols.

 18. THE CASTILIAN. A SPANISH TALE. 3 vols.




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE:

Obvious printer errors have been corrected. Otherwise, the author's
original spelling, punctuation and hyphenation have been left intact.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Exclusives (vol. 3 of 3), by 
Charlotte Campbell Bury

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EXCLUSIVES (VOL. 3 OF 3) ***

***** This file should be named 55746-0.txt or 55746-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/5/7/4/55746/

Produced by Chris Whitehead and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

