The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Pearl of Love, by Madeline Leslie

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Pearl of Love
       or, Josey's Gift

Author: Madeline Leslie

Release Date: September 26, 2010 [EBook #33811]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PEARL OF LOVE ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net. (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)







[Illustration: MRS. LESLIE'S BIBLE PEARLS.]




The Pearl of Love:

OR,

JOSEY'S GIFT.

_BY MRS. MADELINE LESLIE._

"Love is the fulfilling of the law."--ROM. 13:10.

BOSTON:

PUBLISHED BY A. F. GRAVES,

20 CORNHILL.

Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1868, by

REV. A. B. BAKER,

In the Clerk's Office of the District Court for the District of
Massachusetts.


To

FRANK RANDALL, RUTH, MAY, RANDOLPH MORGAN,
AND JAMES WALDINGFIELD,

CHILDREN OF

D. F. APPLETON, Esq., New York,

THESE "BIBLE PEARLS" ARE AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED
BY THE AUTHOR.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER I.

                        Page

JOSEY'S RIDE              11

CHAPTER. II.

THE TWO NURSES            21

CHAPTER III.

THE WRONG BABY            33

CHAPTER IV.

JOSEY'S TEMPER            48

CHAPTER V.

JOSEY'S CHRISTMAS         61

CHAPTER VI.

THE BURNED BABY           74

CHAPTER VII.

JOSEY'S SORROW            86

CHAPTER VIII.

JOSEY'S GIFT             100




_The Pearl of Love._




CHAPTER I.

JOSEY'S RIDE.


"Please mamma, may I go to ride with you?" asked little red-cheeked
Josey Codman.

Mamma was tying on baby's silk hood, and did not answer for a minute.

"I would let him go," urged Aunt Fanny. "He can sit between us; and he
wont be a bit of trouble."

Josey clapped his hands.

"I'm going, mamma, isn't I?"

"Can Nurse get him ready quick enough?"

"Yes, indeed! Run, Josey, for your new hat. Nurse bring his sack from
the hall. It's fortunate I curled his hair before dinner. It's all dry
now; come, pet, stand still while I baste in a clean ruffle."

Baby Emma didn't like so many wrappings around her neck, and began to
throw back her head in an alarming manner. Mamma gave her to Nurse to
carry about, while she put on her bonnet. Then the carriage drove to the
door. Papa had to be called from his study. Nurse scrabbled on her hat
and shawl, and at last they were all seated in the back, and the driver
cracked his whip, calling out to his horses,--

"Go on!"

"Why!" said papa, "I didn't know Josey was going."

"But I am. Isn't I, mamma?" cried the boy, his eyes dancing.

"I should think so," answered mamma, laughing. "I don't know as it was
best, we shall be out late."

"Oh, we'll manage somehow," said Aunt Fanny, "Josey is such a good boy!"

"Nurse," began mamma, "you must be careful what Josey eats for supper;
only bread and butter, with a cup of milk."

"Yes, ma'am."

"And if he grows sleepy before service is through, take off his jacket
and let him go to sleep. You will be in Mrs. Reed's nursery."

"Yes, ma'am, where we were before."

"Baby's asleep, so soon," said Aunt Fanny, watching the infant's head
nodding over Nurse's shoulder. "Lay her down. She'll sleep all the way,
and be as good as a kitten."

"Don't let her soil her new cloak, Nurse," said mamma. "Fanny, the cloak
looks beautifully! handsomer than I thought it would."

"I always liked that color," answered Aunt Fanny, "it's real bird of
paradise. Untie baby's hood; now Nurse, she'll sleep easy."

Mamma and aunty were on the back seat, with Josey tucked in between
them; papa and Nurse, opposite. Papa turned from one to another as they
spoke; but he did not listen to a word that was said. There was to be a
great meeting in the Tabernacle Church that evening, and he was to
preach. As they rode along, his mind was fixed on what he was going to
say.

Mr. and Mrs. Codman did not always live near the great city where they
were now going. Their home was more than a thousand miles away; but they
had come here to reside for a year or two, and had rented a pretty
cottage nearly ten miles from town.

On three sides of the cottage, there was a piazza, with pillars all
covered with woodbine and honeysuckle. In the barn at the end of the
garden, was a horse which the clergymen used for his daily ride to the
Post Office. When they went to town, they always hired a hack from the
stable.

Mr. Codman was a very learned man, as well as a faithful, devout
minister. Everybody loved him, for he loved everybody, but especially
little children. If he were riding through the village, he always liked
to watch the boys at their play, or the little girls trundling their
hoops. Whenever there was a cry of distress he was off from his horse
in a minute, ready to assist the child who had fallen, or to relieve any
one of their troubles.

The children of course loved him. Many a time in the early spring, as he
came out of his gate in the morning, he would find a group of them
standing there to say "good morning!" or to offer him a bunch of
violets.

Sometimes papa took Josey on the saddle before him; and then how the
children would shout with glee, and press up to speak a word to the
pretty boy.

Mr. Codman was not the minister of the village, though he sometimes
preached for the clergyman; but he always improved every opportunity to
tell those around him of the love of God, who sent his only Son into the
world to save sinners.

[Illustration: JESSEY LEARNING TO RIDE. VOL. I.]




CHAPTER II.

THE TWO NURSES.


At seven o'clock Mr. and Mrs. Codman and Fanny started for church. Dr.
and Mrs. Reed went, too; and another clergyman with his wife, by the
name of Matthews. Mrs. Matthews had been invited to tea, and had brought
her baby, a little girl, nearly the same age as Mrs. Codman's.

Soon after they were gone, Ann perceived that Josey was sleepy, and
easily persuaded him to lie down on the bed. Then the two nurses, having
had their supper, began to chat, while they tended the babies.

"Look now!" said Ann, dancing Miss Emma on her lap, "the two of them
look as much alike as a pair of kittens."

"Except," answered Martin, "that your Miss has black eyes; and mine,
blue."

"That's true for ye, but then their mouths are the same, and sure enough
I thought before, that no baby could equal ours for a small mouth."

In the mean time Emma and Rose cooed and coquetted with each other in
the very best of spirits, until a late hour, when they both went quietly
to sleep.

"Feth and a pretty sight they're making," suggested Ann, pointing with
some pride to the bed; the two little ones lying side by side, and
Master Josey across the foot, with his rosy cheek resting on his hand.

"It looks for all the world like a baby asylum," was Martin's laughing
reply.

"I wonder what Mr. Codman is preaching about," she added; "I would like
to be within sound of his voice, it's a treat to hear him."

"I heard Miss Fanny saying to her sister that the text was to be from
Ephesians 4:32. 'Be ye kind one to another.' You know it's before the
'Young Men's Society,' he's preaching to-night."

"And fine words they are to put before any society. I'll ask Mistress to
tell me about it to-morrow. Sure, I've read in some good book, that
kindness to every one would just turn this wicked world into a heaven,
like where the angels live."

"I believe it would," replied Ann, "for if everybody loved, sure there'd
be no stealing, nor lying, nor any such wickedness. And then, why, there
would be no prisons, nor jails. Indeed, Martin, I think it must be the
finest text in the whole Bible."

"Because," added Martin, in an approving tone, "the greatest kindness of
all was, when the Lord of glory himself loved us poor sinners so well
that he couldn't bear to see us ruined forever, and so he gave himself
to die on the cross in our stead."

"Would we have had to die there, if he hadn't?" asked Ann, with a look
of awe.

"Not just there, maybe; but we would have had no hope of being happy,
because there was God with a sword over our heads; and he couldn't take
it away, till somebody, equal to the whole world of people, suffered the
penalty in our stead."

"I see it now, I've heard Master explain, that Jesus being the Son of
God, his blood was more precious than the blood of all the human race;
and if all the sins of all the people were washed in it, there still
would be enough to save millions on millions more."

"Well," murmured Martin, after a pause, "we can't be kind enough to
people after such an example as the Lord has set us."

The great clock on a neighboring church struck nine.

"They'll soon be home now," she added, springing to her feet, "I'll just
bring my baby's cloak and hood from the closet, and have them ready."

"It's a fine night for a ride," said Ann, bringing Josey's coat and
cap, and laying them on a chair. "Baby slept all the way into town, and
I expect she'll sleep going home."

"You have to go nearly twice as far as we do. It's scarce six miles to
Easton Parsonage; but then Mr. Matthews is a very careful driver;
Mistress would like to ride faster than he drives; I wish we were going
the same way!"

Every moment footsteps were listened for; but not till half-past nine
did a carriage drive to the door. Then Aunt Fanny and Mrs. Reed ran up
in a great hurry.

"Come, Ann," said Miss Fanny, hurriedly, "we're late and must be off in
a minute. You put on your sack, and I'll dress Josey. Mrs. Reed has
offered to put on baby's cloak and hood; and, Martin, you had better get
on your bonnet, for the other carriage, with Mrs. Matthews and Mrs.
Codman in it, will be here directly."

The two nurses ran to the back room, where they had taken off their
outer garments, and in less than five minutes, Miss Fanny appeared with
Josey asleep on her shoulder, and Nurse behind her with baby Emma,
closely wrapped in her cloak and hood.

Mr. Codman cut short his wife's "good byes," by saying,--

"It will be midnight, wife, before we reach home;" so, with hasty
adieux, they jumped into the carriage and drove off.

Mr. and Mrs. Matthews followed directly, turning down the opposite
street, Martin screening her baby's face from the night air by a thin
veil.

It was a bright, beautiful evening, but rather cool. Mr. Codman held
Josey close to his breast; and his wife, with a warning to Ann to keep
Emma well covered, began to talk earnestly about the sermon.




CHAPTER III.

THE WRONG BABY.


In this way they rode on for four miles. "Almost half way," Fanny
observed, as they passed the five corners; "I suppose Mr. and Mrs.
Matthews are home by this time."

Just then, Josey awoke with a start and cry of alarm, which roused his
sister, and made her open her eyes. Fanny, who sat opposite, pulled
back her hood to quiet her, when, with a shriek, mamma cried out,--

"We've got the wrong baby! Oh, Nurse, you made a mistake! This is Mrs.
Matthews' Rose. Husband, stop the driver, quick!"

"Are you sure?" asked papa, who had been taking a short nap.

"Sure? Can't I tell my own baby? Emma has black eyes; and, look for
yourself, is this my baby's dress?"

"I see no difference, my dear."

"But, Frederick, it's awful, and every minute we're going farther away
from our little darling."

"Well, my dear, if you are positive, we must turn back, but it is a
great pity such a mistake was made."

"Mrs. Reed dressed both the babies," explained Aunt Fanny, trying to
recover her senses, after the fright.

"And I only carried down the one she gave me," argued Ann, choking back
a sob. "I saw it was our baby's cloak, and I never mistrusted the right
one wasn't inside of it."

It was a difficult matter to make the driver comprehend that he was
expected to go eight or ten extra miles to change babies.

"Why isn't one as good as t'other?" he asked, grumbling. "The horses 'll
never go through with it, and at this time of night it's no use."

But Mr. Codman, who was now wide awake, and well understood the
distress which agitated his wife, without the squeeze she was giving his
hand, and her continual "Oh dear! Oh, my poor baby!" now said, firmly,--

"We wont waste words about it. We must go to Easton parsonage as quickly
as possible."

"I'll take the short cut, then, across the moor. The moon is so bright I
can keep out of the ruts."

"But then we lose the chance of seeing them. They may have found out
the mistake earlier, and be on the way to meet us. Drive on!"

But driver still demurred, muttering that it was a bad job, and he
couldn't be going over the ground four times without good pay.

"How much do you want for yourself?" asked the gentleman. "I hire the
carriage by the month."

"A couple of dollars is little enough."

"I'll give you three; now drive on."

The carriage door shut with a snap, and they started off, driver lashing
his horses with the whip.

"We must look out that they don't pass us," said the clergyman.

"I'll keep watch," responded Aunt Fanny, decidedly. "I wonder what Josey
would say if he were awake?"

"If our driver had been a father," exclaimed Mrs. Codman, "he wouldn't
have asked why one wouldn't do as well as t'other."

"Hem!" exclaimed Aunt Fanny, indignantly. "'Twouldn't have hurt the man
to have heard your sermon to-night, brother. I don't think he's very
kind, any way."

"He was probably at the ale-house, and had taken enough to make him
cross."

"Had he heard you describe how God rewards our love to others by peace
in our own hearts, he would have been more kind."

"Well, Fanny, be as tender in your thoughts as you can. It is hard for
the man to lose three or four hours of his sleep."

"O, you always are ready to find excuses!" she answered, laughing.

"I ought to practise what I preach, oughtn't I?" He looked archly in her
face.

"I hope Emma wont wake," said mamma, anxiously. "Little Rosa sleeps as
quietly as a kitten. How strange that none of us noticed the change."

"It's no joke," said Fanny, though she could not help laughing.

They were going over a rough part of the road, and Josey, after growing
restless, suddenly started up.

"Are we most home?" he asked in a sleepy tone.

"We'll get there by and by," answered his father, cheerfully.

"I'm afraid we shall have to go all the way to Mr. Matthews'," said
mamma. "Next time, I'll dress baby myself.'

"Miss Fanny sent me to put on my bonnet," urged nurse. "She said you
were in a hurry."

"No one is to blame, nurse," said her kind master. "It is simply
unfortunate."

Mile after mile they drove on, only meeting an occasional carriage,
until they came in sight of Easton Parsonage. Here the lights were all
out, except one in the chamber; and there persons could be seen moving
about.

A vigorous knock soon brought Mr. Matthews to the door. "I heard
wheels," he said, "and more than half suspected who it was. We made a
sad mistake."

Martin came down, her face very red, bringing baby Emma, and Ann gladly
gave up her charge.

Mrs. Matthews soon appeared with marks of tears.

"Wasn't it dreadful!" she exclaimed, with a fresh burst of grief. "I
wanted to go right back. We were only two miles from the city when we
found out we had brought away the wrong baby; but Mr. Matthews said no,
we must keep her till morning. He thought it very careless of us, but"--

"There was no carelessness about it," urged Fanny, indignantly. "Mrs.
Reed wanted to help; and she put on the wrong cloaks, that was all.
There was never a thought with us of not coming back. Brother wouldn't
have hesitated if it had been twice as far. We knew you'd want your
baby, and we wanted ours."

"I thought you would understand that we should keep your little Miss
till morning," explained Mr. Matthews.

"But mothers have such tender hearts," added Mr. Codman, "and we ought
to thank God for it. Come, wife, we must be off. We have fourteen miles
to go, and it's almost twelve o'clock."

"There's a difference in ministers as in other folks," whispered Martin
aside to Ann. "Mr. Matthews scolded well, and wouldn't hear of going
back; but your master did as he would be done by."

"Just like his text," returned Ann. "'Be ye kind one to another.'"




CHAPTER IV.

JOSEY'S TEMPER.


It was a little past two when the weary family alighted at their own
door. For the last few miles, the moon had been clouded; the horses were
tired; and they had to drive with care.

"Tell Cook we'll have a late breakfast," said mamma, taking her babe
with a kiss. "Now, Nurse, go and get all the sleep you can."

The following morning, Josey couldn't remember coming home at all. He
opened his large hazel eyes very wide, as Aunt Fanny told him what had
happened.

"I'm glad we found her; isn't you?" he asked, again and again.

Baby Emma received a great many extra kisses that day, and the next, and
whenever mamma thought about the mistake. But one week after another
passed on, Mr. Codman preaching once in a while, until Spring came
again.

When Emma was a year and a half old, she was full of mischief; and
Josey, who was now five, sometimes got out of patience. He was just
learning to read, and liked nothing better than to sit on Aunt Fanny's
knee and hear her tell stories. Sometimes Emma, finding no one
watching, would get to mamma's basket and overturn all the spools, or
tangle the thread, and then Aunt Fanny had to start up and attend to
her, and stop the stories very short.

Or baby would climb on a chair to her brother's shelf and pull his nice
books to the floor. Once, indeed, he came in from a walk, and found
mamma busy with a caller, and Emma, who had been left there while Nurse
went an errand, doing a great deal of mischief. She had a new book in
her hand, and just as he found her she was tearing out three or four
leaves, laughing and shouting with delight. Josey ran to take his book
away; but it was too late. His Christmas present was spoiled. Poor boy!
he cried as if his heart would break, and was very angry with his
sister, more so than his mamma had ever seen him. He struck her little
fat hand, exclaiming,--

"You are naughty! naughty! and I don't love you any more."

The visitor rose to go, and Mrs. Codman did not detain her. She was so
grieved at her little boy's actions, she could scarcely command her
voice to say "good-bye." She rung the bell for Ann, and then, taking
Josey by the hand, led him away to his own chamber.

He glanced up into his mamma's face and saw it was very white, and he
began to be sorry for his bad temper.

"Oh, Josey!" she commenced at last, seating him on her knee, "do you
know how you've grieved mamma?" and then the tears began to roll down
her cheeks.

"Emma tore my best book," he said, softly.

"Emma is only a baby, Joseph, and didn't know any better. If you hadn't
struck her, papa would have bought you another one. But, Josey, you
gave way to your anger, and told your darling little sister that you
didn't love her."

"I think she's too big to tear my pictures out," he said, sighing.

"She must be taught to let your things alone," answered mamma, "and you
must remember to put them out of her way; but all the pictures in the
world wouldn't excuse you for treating her so unkindly. Don't you
remember that pretty verse you learned last Sunday? 'Be kindly
affectioned one to another, in honor preferring one another.' Papa
explained to you what it Meant."

"I'm sorry, mamma; but I want my pretty book."

"I'm sorry, too."

She said these words in such a sad tone that Joseph softened at once. He
threw his arms around her neck, exclaiming,--

"Mamma, I'm going to be good and love God like little Samuel in the
temple."

She held him close to her breast, whispering, "'He who loveth God,
loveth his brother also.' This is what St. John tells us. 'If a man say,
I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar.'"

"Oh, mamma! I'm real sorry."

"And he says, too, 'My little children, let us not love in word, neither
in tongue, but in deed and in truth.'"

"What does that mean, mamma, to love _in deed_?"

"It means that it does no good merely to say 'I love you, I love God;'
but we must show it by our actions."

"How could I show Emma, mamma, when she was tearing my book?"

"Think for yourself, Josey."

He looked very serious, his cheeks growing more and more red, but at
last he said, softly,--

"I might have taken the book away, and put it up high; and I might
think, 'She is so little, she don't know any better;' and after I said,
'naughty, naughty!' as you and papa do, then I could kiss her."

"Yes, my own darling, that would have been Christ-like, loving, kind,
and forgiving; and your heart, instead of burning with anger toward your
precious sister, would have been filled with the sweetest emotion, such
as is implied by the words, 'Be kindly affectioned one to another.'"

"May I go and kiss Emma now, mamma?"

"Yes, darling; and I hope you will learn how pleasant love is,
especially between brothers and sisters."




CHAPTER V.

JOSEY'S CHRISTMAS.


Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter, had come and gone; and now Josey was
seven years old, and Emma was baby no longer. There was a tiny girl in
the cradle who was named Grace. The family had returned to their own
home; Mr. Codman preached to his old people.

Aunt Fanny was still with them, though she had agreed to go on a mission
to India with a gentleman now studying for the ministry. She was the
same ardent girl as before, loving her brother's family, and devoted to
their comfort.

Joseph had from his birth been much in her care and was a prime
favorite. She had grieved with his parents at the unkindness and
impatience he had sometimes shown his sister; and she rejoiced with
them that he was becoming so kind and affectionate.

Though Joseph was so young, yet his parents hoped he had become a lamb
of the Good Shepherd. He had faults, as all children have; but he tried
to correct them. His face sometimes flushed when Emma teased him or
meddled with his books, of which he was very careful; but he never
struck her now, and seldom was angry but a minute.

"I try to think," he said to his mamma, "that she don't know better, and
that she's almost always good; and if I wait a minute and remember about
Christ forgiving me, then I feel happy right away."

Josey showed in one way that he was a Christian child. He loved
everybody, and tried to be good to all.

Among the poor people belonging to his father's church, no one was more
welcome to their humble cottages than little Josey. He always had a
pleasant word for each, and often spent hours of his play-time in
reading to the old women of the parish.

At Christmas, his greatest treat, and one that he spent weeks in
preparing for, was to take his box sled (the one he drew his sister in,)
and fill it with the presents he had prepared for his friends.

"Though they are poor," he said, over and over, "I love them dearly,
and I want to have them know it." So he spent all his pocket-money in
buying what mamma and Aunt Fanny thought would be useful.

A pair of mittens for one poor orphan, a flannel shirt for a rheumatic
old man, a pair of glasses for another, and plenty of pies, which he had
hired cook to make. He hired her, because he wanted to feel that the
gifts were his and not his mother's.

Do you wonder every body, rich and poor, loved him, and that, wherever
he went, blessings were showered on his head?

I don't mean those worthless words that so many beggars use without
meaning: "A thousand blessings on your head, Miss."

Oh, no! But real, heart-felt prayers that God would be his Father and
Friend forever.

Do you suppose Josey was a cross, sulky boy? Can you imagine him wearing
a frown? or with his lips in an ugly pout?

No, indeed! It is not possible for one who cultivates such love for all
around him; for one who tries in this way to imitate the example of his
blessed Saviour to be unhappy or cross. Those children who think only of
themselves, who are selfish and greedy, who never heed the blessed
words, "Be ye kind one to another," are the persons to wear sour faces
and pouting lips.

Don't you remember what the good Book says, "Her ways are ways of
pleasantness and all her paths are peace." That means Wisdom's ways, and
one of these paths is love; love to God and love to those around us.

You can well imagine that Josey's father and mother, and aunt and nurse,
were delighted in seeing him growing up to be a good boy; and each of
them were ready to assist him in correcting his faults.

He was neat and orderly; keeping his little treasures arranged nicely
in the drawers mamma gave him, and his clothes each on their own hooks
in his closet. But Joseph was not always prompt in attention to his
duties. He liked so much to hear the talk at table or at the fireside,
that it was a real trial to him to leave the pleasant company, and the
delightful things that were being said; and he often lingered when he
ought to have been on his way to school.

Aunt Fanny used sometimes, by an anxious glance toward the clock, to
remind him of his duty, for she hated to have her favorite reproved; or
his mamma would say gently, "You'll be late again, Josey." If the
conversation was very interesting, he would only push back his chair a
little and wait for papa to say,--

"My son, go this moment."

One day his mamma had a long talk with him on the subject of
procrastination, after which he did much better.

She explained to him that the meaning of the command, "Honor thy father
and thy mother," was not only that a child must obey when told to "go"
or "stay;" but he must strive in every thing to act as would please
them. He must honor them by anticipating their wishes, by acting when
they were absent as he knew they would approve if they were present.

She told him that he could please the Lord Jesus by a dutiful attention
to their desires, such as, always to be in season for school, or
punctual to any engagement, just as much as by being honest and
truthful. The dear Saviour would look into his heart and know he was
trying to do right out of love for him.




CHAPTER VI.

THE BURNED BABY.


The winter after Josey was eight years old, his parents received a visit
from their dear friends Mr. and Mrs. Matthews and little Rose. Two
infant brothers had died since they last met, and Rose was still their
only daughter.

Emma was now in her fifth year, and Rose only a few weeks younger.

Many a time during the visit, did the mothers and Aunt Fanny talk over
the mistake made by Mrs. Reed, at which no one was more sorry than Mrs.
Reed herself. Many a time they laughed over the question of the cross
driver:

"Why wont one do as well as t'other?"

The man had married afterward, and when a tiny babe was put into his
arms, and he was told it was his own, he understood well why every
father and mother love their own children best.

Aunt Fanny was soon going to leave the country. They had all been busy
for months in getting her clothes ready for the voyage, and a missionary
society in the village were making shirts, etc., for her friend, Mr.
Barnard.

One afternoon, she walked to the village to give some directions that
had been requested, and took the opportunity to make her last calls on
some of her poor families.

The tea hour passed, and she did not return. Her brother did not know
where she was gone, so they were obliged to wait patiently for her
return, though Josey grew every moment more anxious.

At last it was within half an hour of his bedtime,--Emma and Rose had
long before gone to their cribs,--when Aunt Fanny's welcome voice was
heard.

She looked very pale, and all knew at once that something must have
happened. She motioned Josey to her side, and laid her head on his
shoulder as he stood by. Presently she exclaimed,--

"I have seen a dreadful sight! Oh, I never can get it out of my mind!
The screams and shrieks, I hear them yet!"

"What is it? do tell us," urged her sister.

"You know little Juley Lane, what a passionate child she has always
been. I told Mrs. Lane the last time I was there, it wasn't safe to
leave her with the baby. She didn't seem to have any love for him. Now
she's killed him."

Josey gave a start and sob of horror, while Mrs. Codman exclaimed,--

"Shocking! terrible! how did it happen?"

"I was making calls," added Fanny, with a groan, "and I met Mrs. Lane.
She was hurrying with a basket of clean clothes, and told me she'd been
obliged to leave Juley with her old mother and the baby. I told her I
was going to call, which relieved her anxiety, and she said she'd be
home in a short time.

"Long before I reached the house I heard awful groans, and on opening
the door, what a sight was before me.

"Mrs. Lane, thinking the baby would be safer, had tied him into the high
chair, and set him in front of the stove. Julia had one of her fits of
anger and pushed him over. His poor hands and face fell upon the hot
iron and burned to a crisp. When I went in, the old woman had crawled on
her hands and feet, to the place, and was trying, with her poor deformed
fingers, to release him. Juley stood by, frightened and crying, but not
able to do anything.

"I flew to untie him from his chair, which was in a bright blaze, and
then rushed to the door to send for a doctor. Then the mother came. Oh,
dear! I wouldn't go through such a scene again for a kingdom. I don't
believe the poor child was conscious; the doctor thought not; but such a
sight! You wouldn't know him from a piece of burnt wood; and there he
lay, only showing he was alive by a feeble groan.

"Mrs. Lane shrieked and tore her hair, and when Juley pulled her dress,
I was afraid she'd kill her, too. So I got a neighbor to carry her off,
screaming and fighting. The old woman hasn't been across the room
before by herself for a year, and now lies speechless on the bed; I
don't believe she'll live till morning."

Mr. Codman put on his hat directly and hurried away to the distressed
family, while his wife took off Fanny's hat, and brought her a cup of
tea, begging her to try and eat a piece of toast.

"You'll be sick, dear, if you don't," she urged. "The shock has been too
much for you."

"I can't hold the cup;" sobbed Fanny, giving way at last; and then she
held up her poor burned hands and arms.

"Oh! oh dear!" screamed her sister.

"My poor, poor girl!" exclaimed Mrs. Matthews; and then they and Josey
and Nurse all cried together.

In less than half an hour Mr. Codman returned, and the doctor with him.

The old woman had breathed her last. Fanny had saved her from burning
to death, by tearing off her blazing clothes at the risk of her own
life. The neighbors all said Miss Fanny was an angel. If it had not been
for her presence of mind, the house would have been burned, and the
widow have lost everything.

The doctor bound up the poor, blistered hands and arms, talking
cheerfully as he did so, but, his eyes grew moist as he told them
afterward what she had done.




CHAPTER VII.

JOSEY'S SORROW.


In the hurry and excitement, no one thought of little Josey. It was not
till Aunt Fanny was sinking to sleep from the effects of the doctor's
medicine that his mother found him sobbing by himself in the corner.

"What will become of Juley, mamma? will she have to be put into
prison?"

"Don't think about Juley to-night, dear," she answered, soothingly.
"You'll cry yourself sick. We must all thank God, who saved our dear
Aunt Fanny's life. She was so good and thoughtful, and did not once stop
on account of the pain in her hands, but threw water on the flames, and
almost lifted the old woman into bed."

"Oh, mamma! I am glad about that; but I can't help thinking, if you
hadn't taught me to love my sister, and not give way to temper, I might
have--I mean, dear, darling Emma might have been burned to death. Do you
think God has forgiven me, mamma, for striking her as I used to?"

"Yes, Josey, I am sure He has. You're a kind, affectionate brother now,
teaching your sister to be patient and obliging."

She saw the shock had been too much for him. He trembled excessively as
he tried to unbutton his jacket.

"I'll talk with you all about it to-morrow," she said; "try to say your
prayers now, and go to sleep."

"But, mamma, are you sure Aunt Fanny will get well? She did groan so,
when the doctor touched her arm."

"Oh, yes! I hope she'll be better in a few days. Burns are always very
painful at first."

"Well, Aunt Fanny is a good missionary. Isn't she? She was kind one to
another."

"Yes, indeed! she always is that; just like your father, you know."

Mr. Codman wrote Mr. Barnard the same evening, and he came the day but
one after the poor baby was burned, just as Mr. and Mrs. Codman were
starting to attend the funeral of the old lady and child.

Fanny was dressed and sitting in an easy chair, both arms bandaged to
the elbows and laid out on a pillow. She looked very white, except where
a fever spot burned on each cheek. Mrs. Matthews sat by, talking in a
cheerful tone, while Rose and Emma played with their dolls in the corner
of the chamber.

With a gentle knock Mrs. Codman peeped in, asking, in a mysterious
voice,--

"Are you ready for visitors?" Then, without waiting for an answer, she
beckoned the young missionary to come forward.

He flew to her side, and, not daring to trust his voice, instantly
kissed her cheek.

"This is Mrs. Matthews," Mrs. Codman said. "She will be happy to tell
you what a heroine your Fanny has been. I must run away, or I shall be
late."

Mrs. Matthews repeated some of the particulars of the dreadful accident,
and then, seeing how hard it was for the young man to control his
feelings, rose, and calling the children, left the room with them.

"My own Fanny," he said, putting his hand softly on her head, "I wish I
could bear this dreadful pain for you. How could you expose your
precious life? What should I have done if you too"--

He stopped suddenly, and walked to the window, but soon returned at the
sound of her voice, saying,--

"James, you are making quite too much of what I did. Any one would have
done the same. I could never look you in the face if I had not tried to
relieve such terrible suffering. But Oh, it was dreadful! I cannot
forget it."

Tears filled her eyes, and he tenderly wiped them away.

"I cannot sleep," she went on, "except under the influence of anodynes.
The shrieks and groans ring in my ears."

"Your nervous system has had a shock, and it will take time to recover.
You know I have been studying a little medicine, and I shall take you
for my first patient. I prescribe perfect rest, and that you see no one
but me."

Fanny laughed. "Josey will have something to say to that," she began.
"He has been the most unwearied little nurse, and his face has grown
very sad."

"Dear little fellow! I shall love him better than ever."

Mr. Barnard staid two days, and then Fanny was obliged to insist that he
should leave her, as there were not quite two months before they were to
sail, and she knew that every moment of his time was filled with
engagements.

Her burns were less painful, and it would still be weeks before she
could help herself at all; but she was surrounded with friends who
delighted in doing anything for her comfort.

She bade him good-bye, with a tear and a smile, not expecting to see him
again till a day or two before their marriage.

He looked back to watch her sitting so white and patient, without one
murmuring word, and thanked God that she was so soon to be his own
loving, faithful wife.

Josey rejoiced that now he could return to his labor of love and feed
his beloved aunt; for she insisted that he did it more skilfully than
any of them.

Those were precious hours to the dear boy, when, with the tray before
him and a spoon in his hand, he ministered to her wants, meantime
telling her all the thoughts of his little heart. Years after he
remembered the words she had said, and tried to improve by them.

He was now fully determined to be a missionary and go out to tell the
heathen about Christ, as his aunt Fanny was going. He began at once to
gather all the tracts and primers he could find, and packed them in an
old valise.

His mother found them there some months later; and explained to him that
the poor Hindoos could not read English.




CHAPTER VIII.

JOSEY'S GIFT.


Aunt Fanny's burns were now nearly healed. For a week she had been
without the bandages, though the wounds were still tender. Her trunks
were mostly packed, and many tokens of love placed there by beloved
friends.

When with her brother's family the young missionary always wore a
cheerful smile; but there were hours when she wept at the thought of
parting from those who were so dear. Yet not for one instant did she
regret the choice of her life. She was going to tell the poor benighted
heathen of the love of Jesus,--to try and persuade them to throw away
their idols, and worship the living and true God.

As she thought of all this, and realized what a privilege it was to save
souls from eternal death, her whole heart glowed with a desire to be
among those for whom she was to labor.

Mr. and Mrs. Matthews had been travelling for some weeks, but had now
returned to be in season for the wedding.

On the Sabbath night previous, the family were seated in the library,
when mamma noticed that Josey was not present. She could not account for
this, because, when out of school, he was scarcely a moment away from
his aunt's side. She went through several rooms in search of him, and
at last found him in a closet by himself, sobbing as if his heart would
break.

"Why must Aunt Fanny go?" he sobbed, "I can't bear it,--I can't bear not
to see her any longer!"

"My darling," said mamma, taking his hand, and leading him to her own
chamber, "do you know what Aunt Fanny is going for?"

"Yes, mamma, but couldn't somebody else do it?" She stopped a moment
and then said,--

"Josey, there was a time, thousands of years ago, when man had sinned,
and there was no hope nor joy for him in the world; there was only the
certainty that his soul must be miserable forever. Then our blessed
Saviour said, 'I pity these poor people and shall try to save them.' He
left his glorious throne, by the side of his Father, and came here to
give himself to death.

"The love and pity of God the Father was so great, that he sent his
beloved Son, that whosoever believeth on him shall have everlasting
life.

"The poor Hindoos know nothing of the true God. They have not the
precious Bible, as we have, to tell them that they need not throw their
babies to the crocodiles,--they need not tear and wound their own flesh,
nor throw themselves under the wheels of the cruel Juggernaut. Your aunt
Fanny and uncle James are going to tell them, they need do nothing of
all this. They desire to say to those poor, ignorant men and women and
children, that Christ's love for them is so great that if they will but
come and accept of his salvation, it shall be freely theirs. She wants
to tell the poor, weary pilgrims, who have been walking hundreds of
miles with stones in their shoes, that the blessed Jesus will accept
them without money, without price, without any of these painful
journeys,--that they have only to lay their load of sin upon him, and he
will carry it for them."

Josey's tears ceased to flow, and he listened with almost breathless
interest.

"Do you want to keep Aunt Fanny from telling them this?" mamma asked.
"Do you want them to go on worshipping those senseless idols, which can
neither see, nor hear, nor understand?"

With a great sob Josey answered,

"No, mamma, I love her dearly, dearly; but I'll let Jesus have her.
He'll know then how I love him."

With a gush of tears, she folded him to her heart. When they were more
calm, she urged him to return to the parlor.

"Pretty soon I will," he said softly, "And oh, mamma, if you'll please
let me sit up an hour later every night till she--I mean, till we're all
alone. Now I'm going to write her a letter."

My little reader, would you like to read it, and see how our dear Josey
showed his love to his Saviour? how he tried to obey the rule, "My
little children let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed
and in truth?" It was this:


     "My dear, darling Aunt Fanny:

     "I've been thinking a great deal about you, and once I said
     I couldn't let you go away; but I'm willing now. I know I
     shall miss you dreadfully. And it makes me cry to think how
     I shall want to hear you pray by my bed, every night; but
     I'll tell you why I'm willing. You know I'm trying to be a
     Christian child, and I do hope the dear Saviour has pardoned
     my sins; so I want to show Him that I really thank Him for
     it, and to-night, I said to myself, 'I have nothing to give
     Jesus, to show him my love, but my dear, dear aunty. I do
     hope it will show the heathen a little, that I love them,
     and want to be kind to them. When you get there, will you
     please tell them a little boy gave his aunt to the Saviour,
     so that they may learn the way to heaven.

     "When I am a man, I hope I shall be a missionary, too; and
     perhaps then God will let me see you and Uncle James again.

                                        "Your little nephew,

                                        "JOSEY CODMAN."




MRS. LESLIE'S

BIBLE PEARLS.


_Series for Boys._

    VOL. I. THE PEARL OF LOVE.

     "  II.  "    "   "  CHARITY.

     "  III. "    "   "  OBEDIENCE.

     "  IV.  "    "   "  PENITENCE.

     "  V.   "    "   "  HOPE.

     "  VI.  "    "   "  PATIENCE.


_Series for Girls._


    VOL. I. THE PEARL OF FAITH.

     "  II.  "    "   "  DILIGENCE.

     "  III. "    "   "  MEEKNESS.

     "  IV.  "    "   "  FORGIVENESS.

     "  V.   "    "   "  HOPE.

     "  VI.  "    "   "  CONTENTMENT.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Pearl of Love, by Madeline Leslie

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PEARL OF LOVE ***

***** This file should be named 33811.txt or 33811.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/8/1/33811/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net. (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
