Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, August 1665, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, August 1665

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 30, 2004 [EBook #4158]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, AUGUST 1665 ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 AUGUST
                                  1665

August 1st.  Slept, and lay long; then up and my Lord [Crew] and Sir G.
Carteret being gone abroad, I first to see the bridegroom and bride, and
found them both up, and he gone to dress himself.  Both red in the face,
and well enough pleased this morning with their night's lodging.  Thence
down and Mr. Brisband and I to billiards: anon come my Lord and Sir G.
Carteret in, who have been looking abroad and visiting some farms that Sir
G. Carteret hath thereabouts, and, among other things, report the greatest
stories of the bigness of the calfes they find there, ready to sell to the
butchers, as big, they say, as little Cowes, and that they do give them a
piece of chalke to licke, which they hold makes them white in the flesh
within.  Very merry at dinner, and so to talk and laugh after dinner, and
up and down, some to [one] place, some to another, full of content on all
sides.  Anon about five o'clock, Sir G. Carteret and his lady and I took
coach with the greatest joy and kindnesse that could be from the two
familys or that ever I saw with so much appearance, and, I believe,
reality in all my life.  Drove hard home, and it was night ere we got to
Deptford, where, with much kindnesse from them to me, I left them, and
home to the office, where I find all well, and being weary and sleepy, it
being very late, I to bed.

2nd.  Up, it being a publique fast, as being the first Wednesday of the
month, for the plague; I within doors all day, and upon my monthly
accounts late, and there to my great joy settled almost all my private
matters of money in my books clearly, and allowing myself several sums
which I had hitherto not reckoned myself sure of, because I would not be
over sure of any thing, though with reason I might do it, I did find
myself really worth L1900, for which the great God of Heaven and Earth be
praised!  At night to the office to write a few letters, and so home to
bed, after fitting myself for tomorrow's journey.

3rd.  Up, and betimes to Deptford to Sir G. Carteret's, where, not liking
the horse that had been hired by Mr. Uthwayt for me, I did desire Sir G.
Carteret to let me ride his new L40 horse, which he did, and so I left my
'hacquenee'--[Haquenee = an ambling nag fitted for ladies'
riding.]--behind, and so after staying a good while in their bedchamber
while they were dressing themselves, discoursing merrily, I parted and to
the ferry, where I was forced to stay a great while before I could get my
horse brought over, and then mounted and rode very finely to Dagenhams;
all the way people, citizens, walking to and again to enquire how the
plague is in the City this week by the Bill; which by chance, at
Greenwich, I had heard was 2,020 of the plague, and 3,000 and odd of all
diseases; but methought it was a sad question to be so often asked me.
Coming to Dagenhams, I there met our company coming out of the house,
having staid as long as they could for me; so I let them go a little
before, and went and took leave of my Lady Sandwich, good woman, who seems
very sensible of my service in this late business, and having her
directions in some things, among others, to get Sir G. Carteret and my
Lord to settle the portion, and what Sir G. Carteret is to settle, into
land, soon as may be, she not liking that it should lie long undone, for
fear of death on either side.  So took leave of her, and then down to the
buttery, and eat a piece of cold venison pie, and drank and took some
bread and cheese in my hand; and so mounted after them, Mr. Marr very
kindly staying to lead me the way.  By and by met my Lord Crew returning,
after having accompanied them a little way, and so after them, Mr. Marr
telling me by the way how a mayde servant of Mr. John Wright's (who lives
thereabouts) falling sick of the plague, she was removed to an out-house,
and a nurse appointed to look to her; who, being once absent, the mayde
got out of the house at the window, and run away.  The nurse coming and
knocking, and having no answer, believed she was dead, and went and told
Mr. Wright so; who and his lady were in great strait what to do to get her
buried. At last resolved to go to Burntwood hard by, being in the parish,
and there get people to do it.  But they would not; so he went home full
of trouble, and in the way met the wench walking over the common, which
frighted him worse than before; and was forced to send people to take her,
which he did; and they got one of the pest coaches and put her into it to
carry her to a pest house.  And passing in a narrow lane, Sir Anthony
Browne, with his brother and some friends in the coach, met this coach
with the curtains drawn close.  The brother being a young man, and
believing there might be some lady in it that would not be seen, and the
way being narrow, he thrust his head out of his own into her coach, and to
look, and there saw somebody look very ill, and in a sick dress, and stunk
mightily; which the coachman also cried out upon.  And presently they come
up to some people that stood looking after it, and told our gallants that
it was a mayde of Mr. Wright's carried away sick of the plague; which put
the young gentleman into a fright had almost cost him his life, but is now
well again.  I, overtaking our young people, 'light, and into the coach to
them, where mighty merry all the way; and anon come to the Blockehouse,
over against Gravesend, where we staid a great while, in a little
drinking-house.  Sent back our coaches to Dagenhams.  I, by and by, by
boat to Gravesend, where no newes of Sir G. Carteret come yet; so back
again, and fetched them all over, but the two saddle-horses that were to
go with us, which could not be brought over in the horseboat, the wind and
tide being against us, without towing; so we had some difference with some
watermen, who would not tow them over under 20s., whereupon I swore to
send one of them to sea and will do it.  Anon some others come to me and
did it for 10s.  By and by comes Sir G. Carteret, and so we set out for
Chatham: in my way overtaking some company, wherein was a lady, very
pretty, riding singly, her husband in company with her.  We fell into
talke, and I read a copy of verses which her husband showed me, and he
discommended, but the lady commended: and I read them, so as to make the
husband turn to commend them.  By and by he and I fell into acquaintance,
having known me formerly at the Exchequer.  His name is Nokes, over
against Bow Church.  He was servant to Alderman Dashwood. We promised to
meet, if ever we come both to London again; and, at parting, I had a fair
salute on horseback, in Rochester streets, of the lady, and so parted.
Come to Chatham mighty merry, and anon to supper, it being near 9 o'clock
ere we come thither.  My Lady Carteret come thither in a coach, by
herself, before us.  Great mind they have to buy a little 'hacquenee' that
I rode on from Greenwich, for a woman's horse. Mighty merry, and after
supper, all being withdrawn, Sir G. Carteret did take an opportunity to
speak with much value and kindness to me, which is of great joy to me.  So
anon to bed.  Mr. Brisband and I together to my content.

4th.  Up at five o'clock, and by six walked out alone, with my Lady
Slanning, to the Docke Yard, where walked up and down, and so to Mr.
Pett's, who led us into his garden, and there the lady, the best humoured
woman in the world, and a devout woman (I having spied her on her knees
half an houre this morning in her chamber), clambered up to the top of the
banquetting-house to gather nuts, and mighty merry, and so walked back
again through the new rope house, which is very usefull; and so to the
Hill-house to breakfast and mighty merry.  Then they took coach, and Sir
G. Carteret kissed me himself heartily, and my Lady several times, with
great kindnesse, and then the young ladies, and so with much joy, bade
"God be with you!" and an end I think it will be to my mirthe for a great
while, it having been the passage of my whole life the most pleasing for
the time, considering the quality and nature of the business, and my noble
usage in the doing of it, and very many fine journys, entertainments and
great company.  I returned into the house for a while to do business there
with Commissioner Pett, and there with the officers of the Chest, where I
saw more of Sir W. Batten's business than ever I did before, for whereas
he did own once under his hand to them that he was accountable for L2200,
of which he had yet paid but L1600, he writes them a letter lately that he
hath but about L50 left that is due to the Chest, but I will do something
in it and that speedily. That being done I took horse, and Mr. Barrow with
me bore me company to Gravesend, discoursing of his business, wherein I
vexed him, and he me, I seeing his frowardness, but yet that he is in my
conscience a very honest man, and some good things he told me, which I
shall remember to the King's advantage.  There I took boat alone, and, the
tide being against me, landed at Blackwall and walked to Wapping, Captain
Bowd whom I met with talking with me all the way, who is a sober man.  So
home, and found all things well, and letters from Dover that my Lord
Hinchingbroke is arrived at Dover, and would be at Scott's hall this
night, where the whole company will meet.  I wish myself with them.  After
writing a few letters I took boat and down to Woolwich very late, and
there found my wife and her woman upon the key hearing a fellow in a
barge, that lay by, fiddle.  So I to them and in, very merry, and to bed,
I sleepy and weary.

5th.  In the morning up, and my wife showed me several things of her
doing, especially one fine woman's Persian head mighty finely done, beyond
what I could expect of her; and so away by water, having ordered in the
yarde six or eight bargemen to be whipped, who had last night stolen some
of the King's cordage from out of the yarde.  I to Deptford, and there by
agreement met with my Lord Bruncker, and there we kept our office, he and
I, and did what there was to do, and at noon parted to meet at the office
next week.  Sir W. Warren and I thence did walk through the rain to
Half-Way House, and there I eat a piece of boiled beef and he and I talked
over several businesses, among others our design upon the mast docke,
which I hope to compass and get 2 or L300 by. Thence to Redriffe, where we
parted, and I home, where busy all the afternoon.  Stepped to Colvill's to
set right a business of money, where he told me that for certain De Ruyter
is come home, with all his fleete, which is very ill newes, considering
the charge we have been at in keeping a fleete to the northward so long,
besides the great expectation of snapping him, wherein my Lord Sandwich
will I doubt suffer some dishonour.  I am told also of a great ryott upon
Thursday last in Cheapside; Colonell Danvers, a delinquent, having been
taken, and in his way to the Tower was rescued from the captain of the
guard, and carried away; only one of the rescuers being taken.  I am told
also that the Duke of Buckingham is dead, but I know not of a certainty.
So home and very late at letters, and then home to supper and to bed.

6th (Lord's day).  Dressed and had my head combed by my little girle, to
whom I confess 'que je sum demasiado kind, nuper ponendo mes mains in su
des choses de son breast, mais il faut que je' leave it lest it bring me
to 'alcun major inconvenience'.  So to my business in my chamber, look
over and settling more of my papers than I could the two last days I have
spent about them.  In the evening, it raining hard, down to Woolwich,
where after some little talk to bed.

7th.  Up, and with great pleasure looking over my wife's pictures, and
then to see my Lady Pen, whom I have not seen since her coming hither, and
after being a little merry with her, she went forth and I staid there
talking with Mrs. Pegg and looking over her pictures, and commended them;
but, Lord! so far short of my wife's, as no comparison.  Thence to my
wife, and there spent, talking, till noon, when by appointment Mr. Andrews
come out of the country to speake with me about their Tangier business,
and so having done with him and dined, I home by water, where by
appointment I met Dr. Twisden, Mr. Povy, Mr. Lawson, and Stockdale about
settling their business of money; but such confusion I never met with, nor
could anything be agreed on, but parted like a company of fools, I vexed
to lose so much time and pains to no purpose.  They gone, comes Rayner,
the boatmaker, about some business, and brings a piece of plate with him,
which I refused to take of him, thinking indeed that the poor man hath no
reason nor encouragement from our dealings with him to give any of us any
presents.  He gone, there comes Luellin, about Mr. Deering's business of
planke, to have the contract perfected, and offers me twenty pieces in
gold, as Deering had done some time since himself, but I both then and now
refused it, resolving not to be bribed to dispatch business, but will have
it done however out of hand forthwith. So he gone, I to supper and to bed.

8th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning we sat.  At noon I home
to dinner alone, and after dinner Bagwell's wife waited at the door, and
went with me to my office .  .  .  .  So parted, and I to Sir W. Batten's,
and there sat the most of the afternoon talking and drinking too much with
my Lord Bruncker, Sir G. Smith, G. Cocke and others very merry.  I drunk a
little mixed, but yet more than I should do.  So to my office a little,
and then to the Duke of Albemarle's about some business. The streets
mighty empty all the way, now even in London, which is a sad sight.  And
to Westminster Hall, where talking, hearing very sad stories from Mrs.
Mumford; among others, of Mrs. Michell's son's family.  And poor Will,
that used to sell us ale at the Hall-door, his wife and three children
died, all, I think, in a day.  So home through the City again, wishing I
may have taken no ill in going; but I will go, I think, no more thither.
Late at the office, and then home to supper, having taken a pullet home
with me, and then to bed.  The news of De Kuyter's coming home is certain;
and told to the great disadvantage of our fleete, and the praise of De
Kuyter; but it cannot be helped, nor do I know what to say to it.

9th.  Up betimes to my office, where Tom Hater to the writing of letters
with me, which have for a good while been in arreare, and we close at it
all day till night, only made a little step out for half an houre in the
morning to the Exchequer about striking of tallys, but no good done
therein, people being most out of towne.  At noon T. Hater dined with me,
and so at it all the afternoon.  At night home and supped, and after
reading a little in Cowley's poems, my head being disturbed with overmuch
business to-day, I to bed.

10th.  Up betimes, and called upon early by my she-cozen Porter, the
turner's wife, to tell me that her husband was carried to the Tower, for
buying of some of the King's powder, and would have my helpe, but I could
give her none, not daring any more to appear in the business, having too
much trouble lately therein.  By and by to the office, where we sat all
the morning; in great trouble to see the Bill this week rise so high, to
above 4,000 in all, and of them above 3,000 of the plague.  And an odd
story of Alderman Bence's stumbling at night over a dead corps in the
streete, and going home and telling his wife, she at the fright, being
with child, fell sicke and died of the plague.  We sat late, and then by
invitation my Lord Brunker, Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten and I to Sir G.
Smith's to dinner, where very good company and good cheer.  Captain Cocke
was there and Jacke Fenn, but to our great wonder Alderman Bence, and
tells us that not a word of all this is true, and others said so too, but
by his owne story his wife hath been ill, and he fain to leave his house
and comes not to her, which continuing a trouble to me all the time I was
there.  Thence to the office and, after writing letters, home, to
draw-over anew my will, which I had bound myself by oath to dispatch by
to-morrow night; the town growing so unhealthy, that a man cannot depend
upon living two days to an end.  So having done something of it, I to bed.

11th.  Up, and all day long finishing and writing over my will twice, for
my father and my wife, only in the morning a pleasant rencontre happened
in having a young married woman brought me by her father, old Delkes, that
carries pins always in his mouth, to get her husband off that he should
not go to sea, 'une contre pouvait avoir done any cose cum else, but I did
nothing, si ni baisser her'.  After they were gone my mind run upon having
them called back again, and I sent a messenger to Blackwall, but he
failed.  So I lost my expectation.  I to the Exchequer, about striking new
tallys, and I find the Exchequer, by proclamation, removing to
Nonesuch.--[Nonsuch Palace, near Epsom, where the Exchequer money was kept
during the time of the plague.]--Back again and at my papers, and putting
up my books into chests, and settling my house and all things in the best
and speediest order I can, lest it should please God to take me away, or
force me to leave my house.  Late up at it, and weary and full of wind,
finding perfectly that so long as I keepe myself in company at meals and
do there eat lustily (which I cannot do alone, having no love to eating,
but my mind runs upon my business), I am as well as can be, but when I
come to be alone, I do not eat in time, nor enough, nor with any good
heart, and I immediately begin to be full of wind, which brings my pain,
till I come to fill my belly a-days again, then am presently well.

12th.  The office now not sitting, but only hereafter on Thursdays at the
office, I within all the morning about my papers and setting things still
in order, and also much time in settling matters with Dr. Twisden.  At
noon am sent for by Sir G. Carteret, to meet him and my Lord Hinchingbroke
at Deptford, but my Lord did not come thither, he having crossed the river
at Gravesend to Dagenhams, whither I dare not follow him, they being
afeard of me; but Sir G. Carteret says, he is a most sweet youth in every
circumstance.  Sir G. Carteret being in haste of going to the Duke of
Albemarle and the Archbishop, he was pettish, and so I could not fasten
any discourse, but take another time.  So he gone, I down to Greenwich and
sent away the Bezan, thinking to go with my wife to-night to come back
again to-morrow night to the Soveraigne at the buoy off the Nore.  Coming
back to Deptford, old Bagwell walked a little way with me, and would have
me in to his daughter's, and there he being gone 'dehors, ego had my
volunte de su hiza'.  Eat and drank and away home, and after a little at
the office to my chamber to put more things still in order, and late to
bed.  The people die so, that now it seems they are fain to carry the dead
to be buried by day-light, the nights not sufficing to do it in.  And my
Lord Mayor commands people to be within at nine at night all, as they say,
that the sick may have liberty to go abroad for ayre.  There is one also
dead out of one of our ships at Deptford, which troubles us mightily; the
Providence fire-ship, which was just fitted to go to sea.  But they tell
me to-day no more sick on board. And this day W. Bodham tells me that one
is dead at Woolwich, not far from the Rope-yard.  I am told, too, that a
wife of one of the groomes at Court is dead at Salsbury; so that the King
and Queene are speedily to be all gone to Milton.  God preserve us!

13th (Lord's day).  Up betimes and to my chamber, it being a very wet day
all day, and glad am I that we did not go by water to see "The Soveraigne"

     ["The Sovereign of the Seas" was built at Woolwich in 1637 of timber
     which had been stripped of its bark while growing in the spring, and
     not felled till the second autumn afterwards; and it is observed by
     Dr. Plot ("Phil.  Trans."  for 1691), in his discourse on the most
     seasonable time for felling timber, written by the advice of Pepys,
     that after forty-seven years, "all the ancient timber then remaining
     in her, it was no easy matter to drive a nail into it" ("Quarterly
     Review," vol. viii., p. 35).--B.]

to-day, as I intended, clearing all matters in packing up my papers and
books, and giving instructions in writing to my executors, thereby
perfecting the whole business of my will, to my very great joy; so that I
shall be in much better state of soul, I hope, if it should please the
Lord to call me away this sickly time.  At night to read, being weary with
this day's great work, and then after supper to bed, to rise betimes
to-morrow, and to bed with a mind as free as to the business of the world
as if I were not worth L100 in the whole world, every thing being evened
under my hand in my books and papers, and upon the whole I find myself
worth, besides Brampton estate, the sum of L2164, for which the Lord be
praised!

14th.  Up, and my mind being at mighty ease from the dispatch of my
business so much yesterday, I down to Deptford to Sir G. Carteret, where
with him a great while, and a great deale of private talke concerning my
Lord Sandwich's and his matters, and chiefly of the latter, I giving him
great deale of advice about the necessity of his having caution concerning
Fenn, and the many ways there are of his being abused by any man in his
place, and why he should not bring his son in to look after his business,
and more, to be a Commissioner of the Navy, which he listened to and
liked, and told me how much the King was his good Master, and was sure not
to deny him that or any thing else greater than that, and I find him a
very cunning man, whatever at other times he seems to be, and among other
things he told me he was not for the fanfaroone

     [Fanfaron, French, from fanfare, a sounding of trumpets; hence, a
     swaggerer, or empty boaster.]

to make a show with a great title, as he might have had long since, but
the main thing to get an estate; and another thing, speaking of minding of
business, "By God," says he, "I will and have already almost brought it to
that pass, that the King shall not be able to whip a cat, but I must be at
the tayle of it."  Meaning so necessary he is, and the King and my Lord
Treasurer and all do confess it; which, while I mind my business, is my
own case in this office of the Navy, and I hope shall be more, if God give
me life and health.  Thence by agreement to Sir J. Minnes's lodgings,
where I found my Lord Bruncker, and so by water to the ferry, and there
took Sir W. Batten's coach that was sent for us, and to Sir W. Batten's,
where very merry, good cheer, and up and down the garden with great
content to me, and, after dinner, beat Captain Cocke at billiards, won
about 8s. of him and my Lord Bruncker.  So in the evening after, much
pleasure back again and I by water to Woolwich, where supped with my wife,
and then to bed betimes, because of rising to-morrow at four of the clock
in order to the going out with Sir G. Carteret toward Cranborne to my Lord
Hinchingbrooke in his way to Court.  This night I did present my wife with
the dyamond ring, awhile since given me by Mr. Dicke Vines's brother, for
helping him to be a purser, valued at about L10, the first thing of that
nature I did ever give her.  Great fears we have that the plague will be a
great Bill this weeke.

15th.  Up by 4 o'clock and walked to Greenwich, where called at Captain
Cocke's and to his chamber, he being in bed, where something put my last
night's dream into my head, which I think is the best that ever was
dreamt, which was that I had my Lady Castlemayne in my armes and was
admitted to use all the dalliance I desired with her, and then dreamt that
this could not be awake, but that it was only a dream; but that since it
was a dream, and that I took so much real pleasure in it, what a happy
thing it would be if when we are in our graves (as Shakespeere resembles
it) we could dream, and dream but such dreams as this, that then we should
not need to be so fearful of death, as we are this plague time.  Here I
hear that news is brought Sir G. Carteret that my Lord Hinchingbrooke is
not well, and so cannot meet us at Cranborne to-night. So I to Sir G.
Carteret's; and there was sorry with him for our disappointment.  So we
have put off our meeting there till Saturday next. Here I staid talking
with Sir G. Carteret, he being mighty free with me in his business, and
among other things hath ordered Rider and Cutler to put into my hands
copper to the value of L5,000 (which Sir G. Carteret's share it seems come
to in it), which is to raise part of the money he is to layout for a
purchase for my Lady Jemimah.  Thence he and I to Sir J. Minnes's by
invitation, where Sir W. Batten and my Lady, and my Lord Bruncker, and all
of us dined upon a venison pasty and other good meat, but nothing well
dressed.  But my pleasure lay in getting some bills signed by Sir G.
Carteret, and promise of present payment from Mr. Fenn, which do rejoice
my heart, it being one of the heaviest things I had upon me, that so much
of the little I have should lie (viz. near L1000) in the King's hands.
Here very merry and (Sir G. Carteret being gone presently after dinner) to
Captain Cocke's, and there merry, and so broke up and I by water to the
Duke of Albemarle, with whom I spoke a great deale in private, they being
designed to send a fleete of ships privately to the Streights.  No news
yet from our fleete, which is much wondered at, but the Duke says for
certain guns have been heard to the northward very much.  It was dark
before I could get home, and so land at Church-yard stairs, where, to my
great trouble, I met a dead corps of the plague, in the narrow ally just
bringing down a little pair of stairs.  But I thank God I was not much
disturbed at it.  However, I shall beware of being late abroad again.

16th.  Up, and after doing some necessary business about my accounts at
home, to the office, and there with Mr. Hater wrote letters, and I did
deliver to him my last will, one part of it to deliver to my wife when I
am dead.  Thence to the Exchange, where I have not been a great while.
But, Lord! how sad a sight it is to see the streets empty of people, and
very few upon the 'Change.  Jealous of every door that one sees shut up,
lest it should be the plague; and about us two shops in three, if not
more, generally shut up.  From the 'Change to Sir G. Smith's' with Mr.
Fenn, to whom I am nowadays very complaisant, he being under payment of my
bills to me, and some other sums at my desire, which he readily do. Mighty
merry with Captain Cocke and Fenn at Sir G. Smith's, and a brave dinner,
but I think Cocke is the greatest epicure that is, eats and drinks with
the greatest pleasure and liberty that ever man did.  Very contrary newes
to-day upon the 'Change, some that our fleete hath taken some of the Dutch
East India ships, others that we did attaque it at Bergen and were
repulsed, others that our fleete is in great danger after this attaque by
meeting with the great body now gone out of Holland, almost 100 sayle of
men of warr.  Every body is at a great losse and nobody can tell.  Thence
among the goldsmiths to get some money, and so home, settling some new
money matters, and to my great joy have got home L500 more of the money
due to me, and got some more money to help Andrews first advanced.  This
day I had the ill news from Dagenhams, that my poor lord of Hinchingbroke
his indisposition is turned to the small-pox.  Poor gentleman! that he
should be come from France so soon to fall sick, and of that disease too,
when he should be gone to see a fine lady, his mistresse.  I am most
heartily sorry for it.  So late setting papers to rights, and so home to
bed.

17th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at noon
dined together upon some victuals I had prepared at Sir W. Batten's upon
the King's charge, and after dinner, I having dispatched some business and
set things in order at home, we down to the water and by boat to Greenwich
to the Bezan yacht, where Sir W. Batten, Sir J. Minnes, my Lord Bruncker
and myself, with some servants (among others Mr. Carcasse, my Lord's
clerk, a very civil gentleman), embarked in the yacht and down we went
most pleasantly, and noble discourse I had with my Lord Bruneker, who is a
most excellent person.  Short of Gravesend it grew calme, and so we come
to an anchor, and to supper mighty merry, and after it, being moonshine,
we out of the cabbin to laugh and talk, and then, as we grew sleepy, went
in and upon velvet cushions of the King's that belong to the yacht fell to
sleep, which we all did pretty well till 3 or 4 of the clock, having risen
in the night to look for a new comet which is said to have lately shone,
but we could see no such thing.

18th.  Up about 5 o'clock and dressed ourselves, and to sayle again down
to the Soveraigne at the buoy of the Nore, a noble ship, now rigged and
fitted and manned; we did not stay long, but to enquire after her
readinesse and thence to Sheernesse, where we walked up and down, laying
out the ground to be taken in for a yard to lay provisions for cleaning
and repairing of ships, and a most proper place it is for the purpose.
Thence with great pleasure up the Meadeway, our yacht contending with
Commissioner Pett's, wherein he met us from Chatham, and he had the best
of it.  Here I come by, but had not tide enough to stop at Quinbrough, a
with mighty pleasure spent the day in doing all and seeing these places,
which I had never done before.  So to the Hill house at Chatham and there
dined, and after dinner spent some time discoursing of business.  Among
others arguing with the Commissioner about his proposing the laying out so
much money upon Sheerenesse, unless it be to the slighting of Chatham
yarde, for it is much a better place than Chatham, which however the King
is not at present in purse to do, though it were to be wished he were.
Thence in Commissioner Pett's coach (leaving them there).  I late in the
darke to Gravesend, where great is the plague, and I troubled to stay
there so long for the tide.  At 10 at night, having supped, I took boat
alone, and slept well all the way to the Tower docke about three o'clock
in the morning.  So knocked up my people, and to bed.

19th.  Slept till 8 o'clock, and then up and met with letters from the
King and Lord Arlington, for the removal of our office to Greenwich. I
also wrote letters, and made myself ready to go to Sir G. Carteret, at
Windsor; and having borrowed a horse of Mr. Blackbrough, sent him to wait
for me at the Duke of Albemarle's door: when, on a sudden, a letter comes
to us from the Duke of Albemarle, to tell us that the fleete is all come
back to Solebay, and are presently to be dispatched back again. Whereupon
I presently by water to the Duke of Albemarle to know what news; and there
I saw a letter from my Lord Sandwich to the Duke of Albemarle, and also
from Sir W. Coventry and Captain Teddiman; how my Lord having commanded
Teddiman with twenty-two ships

     [A news letter of August 19th (Salisbury), gives the following
     account of this affair:--"The Earl of Sandwich being on the Norway
     coast, ordered Sir Thomas Teddeman with 20 ships to attack 50 Dutch
     merchant ships in Bergen harbour; six convoyers had so placed
     themselves that only four or five of the ships could be reached at
     once.  The Governor of Bergen fired on our ships, and placed 100
     pieces of ordnance and two regiments of foot on the rocks to attack
     them, but they got clear without the loss of a ship, only 500 men
     killed or wounded, five or six captains among them. The fleet has
     gone to Sole Bay to repair losses and be ready to encounter the
     Dutch fleet, which is gone northward" ("Calendar of State Papers,"
     1664-65, pp. 526, 527).  Medals were struck in Holland, the
     inscription in Dutch on one of these is thus translated: "Thus we
     arrest the pride of the English, who extend their piracy even
     against their friends, and who insulting the forts of Norway,
     violate the rights of the harbours of King Frederick; but, for the
     reward of their audacity, see their vessels destroyed by the balls
     of the Dutch" (Hawkins's "Medallic Illustrations of the History of
     Great Britain and Ireland," ed.  Franks and Grueber, 1885, vol. i.,
     p. 508).  Sir Gilbert Talbot's "True Narrative of the Earl of
     Sandwich's Attempt upon Bergen with the English Fleet on the 3rd of
     August, 1665, and the Cause of his Miscarriage thereupon," is in the
     British Museum (Harl. MS., No. 6859).  It is printed in
     "Archaeologia," vol.  xxii., p. 33.  The Earl of Rochester also gave
     an account of the action in a letter to his mother (Wordsworth's
     "Ecclesiastical Biography," fourth edition, vol. iv., p. 611).  Sir
     John Denham, in his "Advice to a Painter," gives a long satirical
     account of the affair.  A coloured drawing of the attack upon
     Bergen, on vellum, showing the range of the ships engaged, is in the
     British Museum.  Shortly after the Bergen affair forty of the Dutch
     merchant vessels, on their way to Holland, fell into the hands of
     the English, and in Penn's "Memorials of Sir William Penn," vol.
     ii., p. 364, is a list of the prizes taken on the 3rd and 4th
     September.  The troubles connected with these prizes and the
     disgrace into which Lord Sandwich fell are fully set forth in
     subsequent pages of the Diary.  Evelyn writes in his Diary (November
     27th, 1665): "There was no small suspicion of my Lord Sandwich
     having permitted divers commanders who were at ye taking of ye East
     India prizes to break bulk and take to themselves jewels, silkes,
     &c., tho' I believe some whom I could name fill'd their pockets, my
     Lo. Sandwich himself had the least share.  However, he underwent the
     blame, and it created him enemies, and prepossess'd ye Lo. Generall
     [Duke of Albemarle], for he spake to me of it with much zeale and
     concerne, and I believe laid load enough on Lo.  Sandwich at
     Oxford."]

(of which but fifteen could get thither, and of those fifteen but eight or
nine could come up to play) to go to Bergen; where, after several messages
to and fro from the Governor of the Castle, urging that Teddiman ought not
to come thither with more than five ships, and desiring time to think of
it, all the while he suffering the Dutch ships to land their guns to their
best advantage; Teddiman on the second pretence, began to play at the
Dutch ships, (wherof ten East India-men,) and in three hours' time (the
town and castle, without any provocation, playing on our ships,) they did
cut all our cables, so as the wind being off the land, did force us to go
out, and rendered our fire-ships useless; without doing any thing, but
what hurt of course our guns must have done them: we having lost five
commanders, besides Mr. Edward Montagu, and Mr. Windham.

     [This Mr. Windham had entered into a formal engagement with the Earl
     of Rochester, "not without ceremonies of religion, that if either of
     them died, he should appear, and give the other notice of the future
     state, if there was any."  He was probably one of the brothers of
     Sir William Wyndham, Bart.  See Wordsworth's "Ecclesiastical
     Biography," fourth.  edition, vol. iv., p. 615.--B.]

Our fleete is come home to our great grief with not above five weeks' dry,
and six days' wet provisions: however, must out again; and the Duke hath
ordered the Soveraigne, and all other ships ready, to go out to the fleete
to strengthen them.  This news troubles us all, but cannot be helped.
Having read all this news, and received commands of the Duke with great
content, he giving me the words which to my great joy he hath several
times said to me, that his greatest reliance is upon me.  And my Lord
Craven also did come out to talk with me, and told me that I am in mighty
esteem with the Duke, for which I bless God.  Home, and having given my
fellow-officers an account hereof, to Chatham, and wrote other letters, I
by water to Charing-Cross, to the post-house, and there the people tell me
they are shut up; and so I went to the new post-house, and there got a
guide and horses to Hounslow, where I was mightily taken with a little
girle, the daughter of the master of the house (Betty Gysby), which, if
she lives, will make a great beauty.  Here I met with a fine fellow who,
while I staid for my horses, did enquire newes, but I could not make him
remember Bergen in Norway, in 6 or 7 times telling, so ignorant he was.
So to Stanes, and there by this time it was dark night, and got a guide
who lost his way in the forest, till by help of the moone (which
recompenses me for all the pains I ever took about studying of her
motions,) I led my guide into the way back again; and so we made a man
rise that kept a gate, and so he carried us to Cranborne.  Where in the
dark I perceive an old house new building with a great deal of rubbish,
and was fain to go up a ladder to Sir G. Carteret's chamber.  And there in
his bed I sat down, and told him all my bad newes, which troubled him
mightily; but yet we were very merry, and made the best of it; and being
myself weary did take leave, and after having spoken with Mr. Fenn in bed,
I to bed in my Lady's chamber that she uses to lie in, and where the
Duchesse of York, that now is, was born.  So to sleep; being very well,
but weary, and the better by having carried with me a bottle of strong
water; whereof now and then a sip did me good.

20th (Lord's day).  Sir G. Carteret come and walked by my bedside half an
houre, talking and telling me how my Lord is in this unblameable in all
this ill-successe, he having followed orders; and that all ought to be
imputed to the falsenesse of the King of Denmarke, who, he told me as a
secret, had promised to deliver up the Dutch ships to us, and we expected
no less; and swears it will, and will easily, be the ruine of him and his
kingdom, if we fall out with him, as we must in honour do; but that all
that can be, must be to get the fleete out again to intercept De Witt, who
certainly will be coming home with the East India ships, he being gone
thither.  He being gone, I up and with Fenn, being ready to walk forth to
see the place; and I find it to be a very noble seat in a noble forest,
with the noblest prospect towards Windsor, and round about over many
countys, that can be desired; but otherwise a very melancholy place, and
little variety save only trees.  I had thoughts of going home by water,
and of seeing Windsor Chappell and Castle, but finding at my coming in
that Sir G. Carteret did prevent me in speaking for my sudden return to
look after business, I did presently eat a bit off the spit about 10
o'clock, and so took horse for Stanes, and thence to Brainford to Mr.
Povy's, the weather being very pleasant to ride in.  Mr. Povy not being at
home I lost my labour, only eat and drank there with his lady, and told my
bad newes, and hear the plague is round about them there. So away to
Brainford; and there at the inn that goes down to the water-side, I 'light
and paid off my post-horses, and so slipped on my shoes, and laid my
things by, the tide not serving, and to church, where a dull sermon, and
many Londoners.  After church to my inn, and eat and drank, and so about
seven o'clock by water, and got between nine and ten to Queenhive, very
dark.  And I could not get my waterman to go elsewhere for fear of the
plague.  Thence with a lanthorn, in great fear of meeting of dead corpses,
carried to be buried; but, blessed be God, met none, but did see now and
then a linke (which is the mark of them) at a distance. So got safe home
about 10 o'clock, my people not all abed, and after supper I weary to bed.

21st.  Called up, by message from Lord Bruncker and the rest of my
fellows, that they will meet me at the Duke of Albemarle's this morning;
so I up, and weary, however, got thither before them, and spoke with my
Lord, and with him and other gentlemen to walk in the Parke, where, I
perceive, he spends much of his time, having no whither else to go; and
here I hear him speake of some Presbyter people that he caused to be
apprehended yesterday, at a private meeting in Covent Garden, which he
would have released upon paying L5 per man to the poor, but it was
answered, they would not pay anything; so he ordered them to another
prison from the guard.  By and by comes my fellow-officers, and the Duke
walked in, and to counsel with us; and that being done we departed, and
Sir W. Batten and I to the office, where, after I had done a little
business, I to his house to dinner, whither comes Captain Cocke, for whose
epicurisme a dish of partriges was sent for, and still gives me reason to
think is the greatest epicure in the world.  Thence, after dinner, I by
water to Sir W. Warren's and with him two hours, talking of things to his
and my profit, and particularly good advice from him what use to make of
Sir G. Carteret's kindnesse to me and my interest in him, with exceeding
good cautions for me not using it too much nor obliging him to fear by
prying into his secrets, which it were easy for me to do. Thence to my
Lord Bruncker, at Greenwich, and Sir J. Minnes by appointment, to looke
after the lodgings appointed for us there for our office, which do by no
means please me, they being in the heart of all the labourers and workmen
there, which makes it as unsafe as to be, I think, at London.  Mr. Hugh
May, who is a most ingenuous man, did show us the lodgings, and his
acquaintance I am desirous of.  Thence walked, it being now dark, to Sir
J. Minnes's, and there staid at the door talking with him an hour while
messengers went to get a boat for me, to carry me to Woolwich, but all to
no purpose; so I was forced to walk it in the darke, at ten o'clock at
night, with Sir J. Minnes's George with me, being mightily troubled for
fear of the doggs at Coome farme, and more for fear of rogues by the way,
and yet more because of the plague which is there, which is very strange,
it being a single house, all alone from the towne, but it seems they use
to admit beggars, for their owne safety, to lie in their barns, and they
brought it to them; but I bless God I got about eleven of the clock well
to my wife, and giving 4s. in recompence to George, I to my wife, and
having first viewed her last piece of drawing since I saw her, which is
seven or eight days, which pleases me beyond any thing in the world, to
bed with great content but weary.

22nd.  Up, and after much pleasant talke and being importuned by my wife
and her two mayds, which are both good wenches, for me to buy a necklace
of pearle for her, and I promising to give her one of L60 in two years at
furthest, and in less if she pleases me in her painting, I went away and
walked to Greenwich, in my way seeing a coffin with a dead body therein,
dead of the plague, lying in an open close belonging to Coome farme, which
was carried out last night, and the parish have not appointed any body to
bury it; but only set a watch there day and night, that nobody should go
thither or come thence, which is a most cruel thing: this disease making
us more cruel to one another than if we are doggs.  So to the King's
House, and there met my Lord Bruncker and Sir J. Minnes, and to our
lodgings again that are appointed for us, which do please me better to day
than last night, and are set a doing.  Thence I to Deptford, where by
appointment I find Mr. Andrews come, and to the Globe, where we dined
together and did much business as to our Plymouth gentlemen; and after a
good dinner and good discourse, he being a very good man, I think verily,
we parted and I to the King's yard, walked up and down, and by and by out
at the back gate, and there saw the Bagwell's wife's mother and daughter,
and went to them, and went in to the daughter's house with the mother, and
'faciebam le cose que ego tenebam a mind to con elle', and drinking and
talking, by and by away, and so walked to Redriffe, troubled to go through
the little lane, where the plague is, but did and took water and home,
where all well; but Mr. Andrews not coming to even accounts, as I
expected, with relation to something of my own profit, I was vexed that I
could not settle to business, but home to my viall, though in the evening
he did come to my satisfaction.  So after supper (he being gone first) I
to settle my journall and to bed.

23rd.  Up, and whereas I had appointed Mr. Hater and Will to come betimes
to the office to meet me about business there, I was called upon as soon
as ready by Mr. Andrews to my great content, and he and I to our Tangier
accounts, where I settled, to my great joy, all my accounts with him, and,
which is more, cleared for my service to the contractors since the last
sum I received of them, L222 13s. profit to myself, and received the money
actually in the afternoon.  After he was gone comes by a pretence of mine
yesterday old Delks the waterman, with his daughter Robins, and several
times to and again, he leaving her with me, about the getting of his son
Robins off, who was pressed yesterday again .  .  .  .  All the afternoon
at my office mighty busy writing letters, and received a very kind and
good one from my Lord Sandwich of his arrival with the fleete at Solebay,
and the joy he has at my last newes he met with, of the marriage of my
Lady Jemimah; and he tells me more, the good newes that all our ships,
which were in such danger that nobody would insure upon them, from the
Eastland,

     [Eastland was a name given to the eastern countries of Europe.  The
     Eastland Company, or Company of Merchants trading to the East
     Country, was incorporated in Queen Elizabeth's reign (anno 21), and
     the charter was confirmed 13 Car. II. They were also called "The
     Merchants of Elbing."]

were all safe arrived, which I am sure is a great piece of good luck,
being in much more danger than those of Hambrough which were lost, and
their value much greater at this time to us.  At night home, much
contented with this day's work, and being at home alone looking over my
papers, comes a neighbour of ours hard by to speak with me about business
of the office, one Mr. Fuller, a great merchant, but not my acquaintance,
but he come drunk, and would have had me gone and drunk with him at home,
or have let him send for wine hither, but I would do neither, nor offered
him any, but after some sorry discourse parted, and I up to [my] chamber
and to bed.

24th.  Up betimes to my office, where my clerks with me, and very busy all
the morning writing letters.  At noon down to Sir J. Minnes and Lord
Bruncker to Greenwich to sign some of the Treasurer's books, and there
dined very well; and thence to look upon our rooms again at the King's
house, which are not yet ready for us.  So home and late writing letters,
and so, weary with business, home to supper and to bed.

25th.  Up betimes to the office, and there, as well as all the afternoon,
saving a little dinner time, all alone till late at night writing letters
and doing business, that I may get beforehand with my business again,
which hath run behind a great while, and then home to supper and to bed.
This day I am told that Dr. Burnett, my physician, is this morning dead of
the plague; which is strange, his man dying so long ago, and his house
this month open again.  Now himself dead.  Poor unfortunate man!

26th.  Up betimes, and prepared to my great satisfaction an account for
the board of my office disbursements, which I had suffered to run on to
almost L120.  That done I down by water to Greenwich, where we met the
first day my Lord Bruncker, Sir J. Minnes, and I, and I think we shall do
well there, and begin very auspiciously to me by having my account
abovesaid passed, and put into a way of having it presently paid.  When we
rose I find Mr. Andrews and Mr. Yeabsly, who is just come from Plymouth,
at the door, and we walked together toward my Lord Brunker's, talking
about their business, Yeabsly being come up on purpose to discourse with
me about it, and finished all in a quarter of an hour, and is gone again.
I perceive they have some inclination to be going on with their
victualling-business for a while longer before they resign it to Mr.
Gauden, and I am well contented, for it brings me very good profit with
certainty, yet with much care and some pains.  We parted at my Lord
Bruncker's doore, where I went in, having never been there before, and
there he made a noble entertainment for Sir J. Minnes, myself, and Captain
Cocke, none else saving some painted lady that dined there, I know not who
she is.  But very merry we were, and after dinner into the garden, and to
see his and her chamber, where some good pictures, and a very handsome
young woman for my lady's woman.  Thence I by water home, in my way seeing
a man taken up dead, out of the hold of a small catch that lay at
Deptford.  I doubt it might be the plague, which, with the thought of Dr.
Burnett, did something disturb me, so that I did not what I intended and
should have done at the office, as to business, but home sooner than
ordinary, and after supper, to read melancholy alone, and then to bed.

27th (Lord's day).  Very well in the morning, and up and to my chamber all
the morning to put my things and papers yet more in order, and so to
dinner.  Thence all the afternoon at my office till late making up my
papers and letters there into a good condition of order, and so home to
supper, and after reading a good while in the King's works,--[Charles I.'s
Works, now in the Pepysian Library]--which is a noble book, to bed.

28th.  Up, and being ready I out to Mr. Colvill, the goldsmith's, having
not for some days been in the streets; but now how few people I see, and
those looking like people that had taken leave of the world.  I there, and
made even all accounts in the world between him and I, in a very good
condition, and I would have done the like with Sir Robert Viner, but he is
out of towne, the sicknesse being every where thereabouts.  I to the
Exchange, and I think there was not fifty people upon it, and but few more
like to be as they told me, Sir G. Smith and others.  Thus I think to take
adieu to-day of the London streets, unless it be to go again to Viner's.
Home to dinner, and there W. Hewer brings me L119 he hath received for my
office disbursements, so that I think I have L1800 and more in the house,
and, blessed be God! no money out but what I can very well command and
that but very little, which is much the best posture I ever was in in my
life, both as to the quantity and the certainty I have of the money I am
worth; having most of it in my own hand.  But then this is a trouble to me
what to do with it, being myself this day going to be wholly at Woolwich;
but for the present I am resolved to venture it in an iron chest, at least
for a while.  In the afternoon I sent down my boy to Woolwich with some
things before me, in order to my lying there for good and all, and so I
followed him.  Just now comes newes that the fleete is gone, or going this
day, out again, for which God be praised!  and my Lord Sandwich hath done
himself great right in it, in getting so soon out again.  I pray God, he
may meet the enemy.  Towards the evening, just as I was fitting myself,
comes W. Hewer and shows me a letter which Mercer had wrote to her mother
about a great difference between my wife and her yesterday, and that my
wife will have her go away presently.  This, together with my natural
jealousy that some bad thing or other may be in the way, did trouble me
exceedingly, so as I was in a doubt whether to go thither or no, but
having fitted myself and my things I did go, and by night got thither,
where I met my wife walking to the waterside with her paynter, Mr. Browne,
and her mayds.  There I met Commissioner Pett, and my Lord Brunker, and
the lady at his house had been thereto-day, to see her.  Commissioner Pett
staid a very little while, and so I to supper with my wife and Mr.
Shelden, and so to bed with great pleasure.

29th.  In the morning waking, among other discourse my wife begun to tell
me the difference between her and Mercer, and that it was only from
restraining her to gad abroad to some Frenchmen that were in the town,
which I do not wholly yet in part believe, and for my quiet would not
enquire into it.  So rose and dressed myself, and away by land walking a
good way, then remembered that I had promised Commissioner Pett to go with
him in his coach, and therefore I went back again to him, and so by his
coach to Greenwich, and called at Sir Theophilus Biddulph's, a sober,
discreet man, to discourse of the preventing of the plague in Greenwich,
and Woolwich, and Deptford, where in every place it begins to grow very
great.  We appointed another meeting, and so walked together to Greenwich
and there parted, and Pett and I to the office, where all the morning, and
after office done I to Sir J. Minnes and dined with him, and thence to
Deptford thinking to have seen Bagwell, but did not, and so straight to
Redriffe, and home, and late at my business to dispatch away letters, and
then home to bed, which I did not intend, but to have staid for altogether
at Woolwich, but I made a shift for a bed for Tom, whose bed is gone to
Woolwich, and so to bed.

30th.  Up betimes and to my business of settling my house and papers, and
then abroad and met with Hadley, our clerke, who, upon my asking how the
plague goes, he told me it encreases much, and much in our parish; for,
says he, there died nine this week, though I have returned but six: which
is a very ill practice, and makes me think it is so in other places; and
therefore the plague much greater than people take it to be.  Thence, as I
intended, to Sir R. Viner's, and there found not Mr. Lewes ready for me,
so I went forth and walked towards Moorefields to see (God forbid my
presumption!) whether I could see any dead corps going to the grave; but,
as God would have it, did not.  But, Lord! how every body's looks, and
discourse in the street is of death, and nothing else, and few people
going up and down, that the towne is like a place distressed and forsaken.
After one turne there back to Viner's, and there found my business ready
for me, and evened all reckonings with them to this day to my great
content.  So home, and all day till very late at night setting my Tangier
and private accounts in order, which I did in both, and in the latter to
my great joy do find myself yet in the much best condition that ever I was
in, finding myself worth L2180 and odd, besides plate and goods, which I
value at L250 more, which is a very great blessing to me. The Lord make me
thankfull! and of this at this day above L1800 in cash in my house, which
speaks but little out of my hands in desperate condition, but this is very
troublesome to have in my house at this time. So late to bed, well pleased
with my accounts, but weary of being so long at them.

31st.  Up and, after putting several things in order to my removal, to
Woolwich; the plague having a great encrease this week, beyond all
expectation of almost 2,000, making the general Bill 7,000, odd 100; and
the plague above 6,000.  I down by appointment to Greenwich, to our
office, where I did some business, and there dined with our company and
Sir W. Boreman, and Sir The. Biddulph, at Mr. Boreman's, where a good
venison pasty, and after a good merry dinner I to my office, and there
late writing letters, and then to Woolwich by water, where pleasant with
my wife and people, and after supper to bed.  Thus this month ends with
great sadness upon the publick, through the greatness of the plague every
where through the kingdom almost.  Every day sadder and sadder news of its
encrease.  In the City died this week 7,496 and of them 6,102 of the
plague.  But it is feared that the true number of the dead, this week is
near 10,000; partly from the poor that cannot be taken notice of, through
the greatness of the number, and partly from the Quakers and others that
will not have any bell ring for them.  Our fleete gone out to find the
Dutch, we having about 100 sail in our fleete, and in them the Soveraigne
one; so that it is a better fleete than the former with the Duke was. All
our fear is that the Dutch should be got in before them; which would be a
very great sorrow to the publick, and to me particularly, for my Lord
Sandwich's sake.  A great deal of money being spent, and the kingdom not
in a condition to spare, nor a parliament without much difficulty to meet
to give more.  And to that; to have it said, what hath been done by our
late fleetes?  As to myself I am very well, only in fear of the plague,
and as much of an ague by being forced to go early and late to Woolwich,
and my family to lie there continually.  My late gettings have been very
great to my great content, and am likely to have yet a few more profitable
jobbs in a little while; for which Tangier, and Sir W. Warren I am wholly
obliged to.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     A fair salute on horseback, in Rochester streets, of the lady
     Bagwell's wife waited at the door, and went with me to my office
     Because I would not be over sure of any thing
     Being the first Wednesday of the month
     Bottle of strong water; whereof now and then a sip did me good
     Copper to the value of L5,000
     Disease making us more cruel to one another than if we are doggs
     Every body is at a great losse and nobody can tell
     Every body's looks, and discourse in the street is of death
     First thing of that nature I did ever give her (L10 ring)
     For my quiet would not enquire into it
     Give the other notice of the future state, if there was any
     His wife and three children died, all, I think, in a day
     How sad a sight it is to see the streets empty of people
     I met a dead corps of the plague, in the narrow ally
     In our graves (as Shakespeere resembles it) we could dream
     King is not at present in purse to do
     King shall not be able to whip a cat
     Not liking that it should lie long undone, for fear of death
     Ordered in the yarde six or eight bargemen to be whipped
     Pest coaches and put her into it to carry her to a pest house
     Quakers and others that will not have any bell ring for them
     Resolving not to be bribed to dispatch business
     Two shops in three, if not more, generally shut up
     Well enough pleased this morning with their night's lodging





End of Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, August 1665, by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, AUGUST 1665 ***

***** This file should be named 4158.txt or 4158.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/5/4158/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
