The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Dances of Death, by John Holbein

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this ebook.



Title: The Dances of Death
       Through the Various Stages of Human Life wherein the
       Capriciousness of that Tyrant is Exhibited

Author: John Holbein

Release Date: February 2, 2019 [EBook #58808]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DANCES OF DEATH ***




Produced by Chris Curnow and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)





THE DANCES OF DEATH




[Illustration]




[Illustration: _Mors Sceptra ligonebus æquat._]




                        _LE TRIOMPHE DE LA MORT_

                       _Gravé d’aprés les Dessins
                              originaux de_

                              JEAN HOLBEIN

                                  _par_
                              DAVID DEUCHAR
                                  1786

                             _Deuchar fecit_




                                   THE
                            DANCES OF DEATH,
                                 THROUGH
                    THE VARIOUS STAGES OF HUMAN LIFE:
                                 WHEREIN
                    THE CAPRICIOUSNESS OF THAT TYRANT
                              IS EXHIBITED
                      _IN FORTY-SIX COPPER PLATES_;
                                DONE FROM
                          The Original Designs,
                                  WHICH
                WERE CUT IN WOOD, AND AFTERWARDS PAINTED,

                           _BY JOHN HOLBEIN_,

                       IN THE TOWN HOUSE OF BASIL.

                         TO WHICH ARE PREFIXED,

       _Descriptions of each Plate in French and English, with the
           Scripture Text from which the Designs were taken_.

                      ETCHED BY D. DEUCHAR, F.A.S.

                                 London:
        PRINTED BY W. SMITH AND CO. KING STREET, SEVEN DIALS, FOR
  JOHN SCOTT, NO. 447, STRAND; & THOMAS OSTELL, NO. 3, AVE MARIA LANE.
                                  1803.




[Illustration]




PREFACE.


JOHN or HANS HOLBEIN was born at Basil in 1498, and died at London of
the plague in 1554, aged 56. This admirable Painter was instructed in
the art by his father JOHN HOLBEIN. In the early part of his life, he
pursued his studies with incessant assiduity; and being possessed of an
elevated genius, his progress was exceedingly rapid; so that he soon
became far superior to his instructor. He painted equally well in oil,
water colours, and in fresco; and although he had never practised the art
of painting in miniature till he resided in England, yet he afterwards
carried it to its highest perfection.

The invention of Holbein was surprisingly fruitful, and often poetical;
his execution was remarkably quick, and his application indefatigable.
His pencil was exceedingly delicate; his coloring had a wonderful
degree of force; he finished his pictures with exquisite neatness; and
his carnations were life itself. He excelled all his cotemporaries in
portrait, and his genuine works are always distinguishable by the true,
round, lively imitation of flesh visible in them, and also by the amazing
delicacy of his finishing.

The genius and excellence of this master were sufficiently shewn in the
historical style, by two celebrated compositions which he painted in the
Hall of the Steel-yard Company; of which the subjects were the Triumph of
Riches, and the condition of Poverty: these two are universally admired
for the richness of the colouring, as also for the strong character
of the figures through the whole. Frederick Zucchero, on seeing these
pictures, expressed the highest esteem for Holbein, and even copied them
in Indian ink.

In the town of Basil he painted a picture of our Saviour’s Sufferings, as
well as a Dance of Peasants.

Abbé du Bos observes, that the altar-piece at Basil, painted by Holbein,
may be compared with the best productions of Raphael’s disciples for
composition, and preferred to them with respect to colouring; that he
shews a greater degree of knowledge of the chiaro-scuro, and particular
incidents of light that are truly marvellous. But that which contributed
most to raise and establish the reputation of this celebrated Painter was
Death’s Dance, designed and painted by him in the town-house of Basil; a
work truly admirable, and which alone was sufficient to render the name
of Holbein immortal.

Sandrart relates, that he heard Rubens acknowledge, that he had learned
a great deal from the pictures of Death’s Dance; and he recommended them
strongly to the study of many of his own profession.

The learned Erasmus was so much struck by the wonderful display of genius
exhibited in this great work, that he conceived a strong friendship
for Holbein; sat to him for his picture; and recommended him to Sir
Thomas Moore, the then Lord Chancellor of England: and to this incident
our country is indebted for the many excellent performances which it
afterwards received from the pencil of Holbein.

The designs for Death’s Dance were cut in wood by Holbein, and published
with the original texts from which they were taken; from that work the
following plates were done. They contain the whole of Death’s Dance, with
borders and decorations; to which are added, a description of each plate
in French and English, and a portrait of Holbein.




[Illustration: _CREATIO MUNDI_

_Formauit Dominus DEUS hominem de limo terræ, ad imaginem suam creauit
illum, masculum & fæminam creauit eos. GEN. I. & II._]




[Illustration]




EXPLANATIONS

OF

THE SUBJECTS

OF

_THE TRIUMPH OF DEATH_,

BY HANS HOLBEIN.


PLATE I.—FRONTISPIECE.

At the side of a stone table, placed vertically, Holbein appears behind
a curtain, which Death opens to him, to place before his eyes the great
Spectacle of the Scenes of human Life that he is going to sketch. This
is also expressed by an heap of the attributes of grandeur, dignities,
riches, arts, and sciences, mixed with death-heads, which Death is
trampling under his feet. Below is an epitaph from Lucan—_Mors sceptra
ligonibus æquat. Death confounds the sceptre with the spade._ This table
is topped with a medallion, with the portrait of Holbein. Two Genii
support this medallion; the one surrounded with a garland of flowers, the
other lets fly a butterfly, whilst a third is amusing himself with making
soap bubbles. What these allegories mean is easily understood.


PLANCHE I.—LE FRONTISPIECE.

À côté d’une table de pierre posée verticalement, Holbein paroît derrière
un rideau que la Mort lui ouvre, pour mettre sous ses yeux le grand
Spectacle des Scènes de la Vie humaine qu’il va dessiner. Ce qui est
encore désigné par un amas d’attributs de la grandeur, des dignités, des
richesses, d’arts, de sciences, entremêlés de têtes de morts, et que la
Mort elle-même foule à ses pieds. On lit au has cette épigraphe tirée
de Lucain:—_Mors sceptra ligonibus æquat, La Mort confond la sceptre &
la bêche._ Cette table est surmountée d’un médaillon avec le portrait
de Holbein. Deux Génies soutiennent ce médaillon; l’un l’entoure d’une
guirlan de defleurs, & l’autrelaisse échapper un papillon, tandis qu’un
troisième s’amuse à faire des bulles de savon. On sent assez ce que
signifient ces deux allégories.


PLATE II.—SIN.

Holbein has begun the scenes of life by that which had such influence on
all the rest. The Mother of the human race holds in her right hand, the
fatal apple, which she has just received from the serpent with a young
man’s head; and Adam, at the same time, is plucking another, enticed by
the solicitations of the too credulous Eve, who shews him the one she has
received.


[Illustration: _Quia audisti vocem uxoris tuæ, et comedisti de ligno, ex
quo præceperam tibi ne comederes, &c. Gen. iii. 17._]


PLANCHE II.—LE PECHE.

Holbein a commencé ces scènes de la vie par celle qui eut tant
d’influence sur toutes les autres. La Mère du genre humain, tient dans sa
main droite, la pomme fatale qu’elle vient de recevoir du serpent à tête
de jeune homme, & Adam en cueille en même tems une autre, excité par les
sollicitations de la trop crédule Eve, qui lui montre celle qu’elle a
reçue.


PLATE III.—PUNISHMENT.

Our first parents, driven out by the Angel, are flying from the
terrestrial Paradise, preceded by Death, who is playing on the fiddle,
and shews by dancing the joy he feels for his triumph.


[Illustration: _Emisit eum Dominus Deus de Paradiso voluptatis, ut
operaretur terram, de qua sumptus est. Gen. iii. 23._]


PLANCHE III.—LA PUNITION.

Nos premiers Parens chassés par l’Ange, s’enfuyent du Paradis terrestre
précédés de la Mort, qui joue de la guitare, & démontre en dansant la
joie qu’elle ressent de son triomphe.


PLATE IV.—CONDEMNATION TO LABOUR.

Holbein, to mark at once the species of labour which is the lot of man,
and that which falls to the share of the woman, represents Adam employed
in rooting up a tree, along with Death, who helps him with all his might;
and at a little distance Eve suckling her child, and holding a distaff.


[Illustration: _Maledicta terram in opere tuo, in laboribus comedes
cunctis diebus vitæ tuæ donet revertaris, &c. Gen. iii. 14._]


PLANCHE IV.—LA CONDEMNATION AU TRAVAIL.

Holbein, pour marquer en même tems le genre de travail qui est le
partage de l’homme, & celui qui est le partage de la femme, représente
Adam occupé à déraciner un arbre, avec la Mort qui l’aide de toutes
ses forces, & un peu plus loin, Eve allaitant son enfant & tenant une
quenouille.


PLATE V.—THE POPE CROWNING AN EMPEROR.

A cardinal and three bishops are assisting at the ceremony; Death is
there also under the figure of two skeletons, one of which is dressed
in cardinal’s robes, the other embraces the holy Father, with the right
hand, and is leaning on a crutch with the left.


[Illustration: _Moriatur sacerdos magnus. Josh. xx. 6._

_Et episcopatum ejus accipiat alter. Psal. cviii. 8._]


PLANCHE V.—LE PAPE COURONNANT UN EMPEREUR.

Un cardinal & trois evêques assistent à cette cérémonie; la Mort s’y
trouve aussi sous la figure de deux squelettes, dont l’un est revêtu des
habits de cardinal; l’autre embrasse le St. Père de la main droite, et
s’appuie de la gauche sur une béquille.


PLATE VI.—THE CARDINAL.

A messenger has just presented to him, on his knees, the bull that
constitutes him a cardinal. Death seizes this moment to make his
appearance, and seems to want to turn his hat upon his head. The
messenger is holding in his right hand a tin box, hung by a strap, in
which he had, no doubt, carried the bull, which the new made cardinal
holds in his right hand with the seals appended to it.


[Illustration: _Væ qui justificatis impium pro muneribus, et justitiam
justi aufertis ab eo. Isa. v. 23._]


PLANCHE VI.—LE CARDINAL.

Un messager vient de lui remettre, en faisant une génuflexion, la
bulle qui le fait cardinal. La Mort saisit ce moment pour paroître, et
semble vouloir lui faire tourner son chapeau sur la tête. Le messager
tient de la main droite une boîte de fer-blanc, pendu à une courroie,
et dans laquelle il avoit sans doute apporté la bulle, que le cardinal
nouvellement créé tient à la main droite avec les sceaux y affixé.


PLATE VII.—THE ELECTOR.

This prince, as he is coming out of his palace with his courtiers, is
accosted by a poor woman, who implores his help for herself and the
infant she holds by the hand; but he, insensible to the distresses of
the widow and orphan, refuses to listen, and is turning aside with a
disdainful air to his courtiers. Death at this instant appears; and his
severe aspect announces, that he is just about to make him repent his
hard-heartedness.


[Illustration: _Princeps induetur mœrore, et quiescere faciam superbiam
potentium. Ezek. vii. 24, 27._]


PLANCHE VII.—L’ELECTEUR.

Ce prince sortant de son palais avec ses courtisans, est abordé par
une pauvre femme qui implore son secours, pour elle & pour l’enfant
qu’elle tient par la main; mais insensible aux besoins de la veuve & de
l’orphelin, il refuse de l’écouter, & se tourne d’un air dédaigneux du
côté de ses courtisans. La Mort paroît dans cet instant, & son air sévère
annonce qu’elle va le faire répentir de la dureté.


PLATE VIII.—THE BISHOP.

With an air of tranquillity and resignation, this worthy Pastor follows
Death, who is leading him away laughing and dancing, whilst some
shepherds, forgetting their flocks, are wandering here and there through
the country, in despair for the loss of their chief. The sun, now ready
to set, is just about to leave in darkness the ill-fated flocks, who,
having no longer a conductor, will soon become the prey of wolves and
other ravenous animals.


[Illustration: _Percutiam pastorem, et dispergentur oves gregis. Matt.
xxvi. 31._]


PLANCHE VIII.—L’EVEQUE.

D’un air de tranquillité & de résignation ce bon Pasteur suit la Mort,
qui l’emmène en riant et en dansant, tandis que quelques bergers,
oubliant leur troupeau, errent çà & là dans la campagne, désespérés de
la perte de leur chef. Le soleil prêt à se coucher, va laisser dans les
ténèbres ce malheureux troupeau, qui n’ayant plus de conducteur, sera
bientôt la proie du loup & des autres bêtes féroces.


PLATE IX.—THE CANON.

At the moment he is entering the church, Death accosts him; and, shewing
him an hour-glass run down, announces that his hour is come. He appears
to be a dignitary of the first rank; for he is followed by a page, a
huntsman, who carries a falcon on his fist, and a fool.


[Illustration: _Ecce appropinquat hora. Matth. xxvi. 45._]


PLANCHE IX.—LE CHANOINE.

Au moment où il entre dans l’église, la Mort l’aborde, & en lui montrant
un sable écoulé, lui annonce que son heure est venue. Il paroît que c’est
un dignitaire du premier rang, puis qu’il est suivi d’un page, d’un
veneur qui porte un faucon sur le poing, & d’un bouffon.


PLATE X.—THE FRIAR PROVISOR.

As he is just stepping into his convent, with his Christmas-box and
wallet, Death stops him at the door; and deaf to his cries, as well as
regardless of the fright he throws him into, drags him with all his might
by the cloak, and renders all the good Friar’s attempts to disengage
himself ineffectual.


[Illustration: _Sedentes in tenebris & umbra Mortis: vinctos in
mendicitate. Psal. cvi. 10._]


PLANCHE X.—LE FRERE QUETEUR.

Pret à rentrer dans son couvent avec sa tire-lire & sa besace, la Mort
l’arrête à la porte, & toute aussi sourde à ses cris, qu’insensible à
l’effroi qu’elle lui cause, elle le tire de toutes ses forces par son
capuchon, & rend impuissans les efforts du bon Frère pour se dérober de
ses mains.


PLATE XI.—THE ABBE.

Death, not contented with stripping this fat Prelate of his crosier,
which he is carrying in triumph on his shoulder, and his mitre, with
which he is dressing himself, is dragging him away without pity. He
raises his breviary with one hand, and with the other is making some vain
efforts to push him off.


[Illustration: _Ipse morietur, quia non habuit disciplinam, et in
multitudine stultitiæ decipietur. Prov. v. 23._]


PLANCHE XI.—L’ABBÉ.

La Mort non contente d’avoir arraché à ce gros Prélat sa crosse, qu’elle
porte en triomphe sur son épaule, & sa mitre, dont elle s’est affublée,
le tire encore impitoyablement après elle; il élève d’une main son
breviaire, & fait de l’autre de vains efforts pour la repousser.


PLATE XII.—THE ABBESS.

Death ludicrously hooded with several flowing plumes, and robed in a
kind of gown, carries out of her convent an Abbess, whom he is dragging
with all his might by her scapulary. The reverend Mother with regret is
leaving life and the honours she enjoys; and expresses, by the alteration
of her features and by her cries, the fright that Death has produced in
her soul. Behind her, under the gate of the convent, appears a young Nun,
strangely agitated with terror and grief.


[Illustration: _Laudavi magis mortuos, quam viventes. Eccl. iv. 2._]


PLANCHE XII.—L’ABBESSE.

La Mort ridiculement coiffée de diverses plumes flottantes, & vêtue d’une
espèce de mante, emmène hors de son couvent une Abbesse qu’elle tire de
toutes ses forces par son scapulaire. La révérendissime Mère quitte à
regret la vie & les honneurs dont elle jouit, & exprime par l’altération
de ses traits & par ses cris, l’effroi que la Mort a jeté dans son
âme. On voit derrière elle, sous la porte de l’abbaye, une jeune Nonne
vivement agitée par la crainte & par la douleur.


PLATE XIII.—THE PREACHER.

As he is preaching to his congregation, Death, who is behind him with a
stole about his neck, holds over his head the bone of a dead body, and
by shewing it to the assembly, preaches to them, undoubtedly, the most
eloquent of all sermons.


[Illustration: _Væ qui dicitis malum bonum, et bonum malum: ponentes
tenebras lucem, et lucem tenebras: ponentes amarum in dulce, & dulce in
amarum. Esaiæ v. 20._]


PLANCHE XIII.—LE PREDICATEUR.

Tandis qu’il prêche son auditoire, la Mort qui est derrière lui, une
étole au cou, élève par-dessus sa tête un os de mort, & en la montrant à
l’assemblée lui fait sans doute le plus éloquent de tous les sermons.


PLATE XIV.—THE PRIEST.

He appears carrying the Holy Sacrament along the street to a dying man.
Death marches before him, carrying the lantern and a little bell. He is
followed by a boy, who carries the holy water and a taper, and by a young
woman with a mournful aspect, who seems to have come in quest of him.


[Illustration: _Sum quidem & ego mortalis homo. Sap. vii. 1._]


PLANCHE XIV.—LE PRETRE.

On le voit dans la rue porter le St. Sacrement à un moribond. La Mort
marche devant lui, et porte la lanterne & la clochette. Il est suivi d’un
garçon qui porte l’eau bénite & un cierge, & d’une jeune femme affligée
qui paroît être venue le chercher.


PLATE XV.—THE PHYSICIAN.

Death is leading to him a sick old man, whose urine he is presenting to
him in a phial, and appears saying, in a jeering manner, Dost thou think
that thou art able to save a man whom I have already in my power?


[Illustration: _Medice curate ipsum. Lucæ iv. 23._]


PLANCHE XV.—LE MEDECIN.

La Mort lui amène un vieillard malade dont elle lui présente l’urine dans
une phiole, & paroît lui dire d’un air moqueur; Crois-tu pouvoir sauver
un homme que je tiens déjà en ma puissance?


PLATE XVI.—THE ASTROLOGER.

He has his eyes fixed on a sphere hanging from the ceiling, and appears
profoundly engaged in the vain chimeras of judicial astrology, while
Death comes to turn his attention upon a death-head, which he is
presenting to him in a most grotesque attitude, seeming to say, in a
jeering tone, Could thy sublime art inform thee, that I was coming to pay
thee this visit to-day?


[Illustration: _Indica mihi, si nosti, omnia sciebas. Tunc quod
nasciturus esses? & numerum dierum tuorum noveras? Job xxxviii. 18, 21._]


PLANCHE XVI.—L’ASTROLOGUE.

Il a les yeux fixés sur une sphère suspendue au plancher, & paroît
profondément occupé des vaines chimères de l’astrologie judiciaire,
tandis que la Mort vient tourner son attention sur une tête de mort,
qu’elle lui présente dans l’attitude la plus grotesque, & semble lui dire
d’un ton railleur; Ton art sublime a-t-il pu t’apprendre que je viendrois
te rendre aujourd’hui cette visite?


PLATE XVII.—THE EMPEROR.

Seated on a throne, and holding in his hand the sword of state, he is
attentively listening to an advocate pleading in a soothing tone, against
an unfortunate peasant, who trembling waits, in the most suppliant
posture, the decree that is to determine his fate. Death at this moment
displays all his power; he proudly takes possession of the bottom of
the throne, and is carelessly leaning his arm on the Monarch’s crown.
The angry aspect, with which the Emperor views the advocate and his two
clients, who are seen standing with their heads uncovered, is a happy
presage for the poor oppressed peasant. At the foot of the throne are
lying the sceptre and globe of the empire, placed on a cushion. Death has
set down his fatal glass beside these attributes of grandeur, which he
can cause to vanish at his pleasure.


[Illustration: _Dispone domui tuæ, quia morieris tu, et non vives. Isaiæ
xxxviii. 1._

_Ibi morieris, et ibi erit currus gloriæ tuæ. Isaiæ xxii. 18._]


PLANCHE XVII.—L’EMPEREUR.

Assis sur son trône, & tenant dans sa main le glaive de l’empire, il
écoute attentivement un avocat qui plaide d’un ton doucereux contre un
malheureux paysan, tandis que celui-ci attend en tremblant, & dans la
posture la plus suppliante, l’arrêt qui doit décider de son sort. La Mort
développe en ce moment toute sa puissance; elle occupé fièrement la fond
du trône, & appuie nonchalemment son brass sur la couronne du Monarque.
L’air irrité avec lequel le Chef de l’Empire regarde l’avocat & ses deux
cliens qu’on voit, la tête découverte, à côté de leur défenseur, est
d’un heureux présage pour le pauvre opprimé. On voit au bas du trône le
sceptre & le globe de l’empire posés sur un coussin. La Mort a placé son
sable fatal à côté de ces atributs d’une grandeur qu’elle peut faire
évanouir à son gré.


PLATE XVIII.—THE KING.

He is seen, eating in state, under a canopy, and served by the officers
of the court. Death is come to put himself in the number, and is at this
instant performing the office of cupbearer. He is pouring out drink to
the Monarch, who holds out to him his great cup, which he is now probably
to empty for the last time. The Prince holds in his left hand a paper,
without doubt a petition, that has just been presented to him.


[Illustration: _Sicut et Rex hodie est, et cras morietur. Eccle. x. 12._

_Nemo enim ex regibus aliud habuit._]


PLANCHE XVIII.—LE ROI.

On le voit manger en cérémonie, assis sous un dais & servi par ses grands
officiers; la Mort est venue se mettre du nombre, & fait en ce moment
l’office d’echanson. Elle verse à boire au Monarque qui lui tend sa large
coupe, qu’il va vraisemblablement vuider pour la dernière fois. Ce Prince
tient de la main gauche un papier, sans doute un placet qu’on vient de
lui remettre.


PLATE XIX.—THE EMPRESS.

In the midst of a pompous march, in the court of a great palace, Death,
who seems here to do the office of gentleman-usher, leads this Princess
to the brink of a grave, and shews her the bounds within which all her
grandeur is to be confined.


[Illustration: _Gradientes in superbia potest Deus humiliare. Daniel iv.
34._]


PLANCHE XIX.—L’IMPERATRICE.

Au milieu d’une marche pompeuse, dans la cour d’un vaste palais, la Mort
qui paroît faire ici l’office d’ecuyer, amène cette Princesse jusqu’au
bord d’une fosse sépulcrale, pour lui faire voir le terme auquel ses
grandeurs viendront aboutir.


PLATE XX.—THE QUEEN.

Death, arrayed in the habits of folly, drags away violently this young
Princess, just as she is coming out of her palace to enjoy the pleasure
of walking. With terror painted in her countenance, she is making the air
resound with mournful cries; the maid of honour, who accompanies her,
agitated with the most violent despair, is imploring the aid of Heaven,
while the buffoon is making vain efforts to defend her against Death, who
holds aloft his glass, to shew that the fatal hour is come.


[Illustration: _Mulieres opulentæ surgite, & audite vocem meam: post dies
enim & annum, vos conturbabimini confidentes. Isaiæ xxxii. 9, 10._]


PLANCHE XX.—LA REINE.

La Mort revêtue des habits de la folie, entraine avec violence cette
jeune Princesse, au moment qu’elle sort de son palais pour jouïr du
plaisir de la promenade; la terreur peinte sur le visage elle faite
rétentir les airs de ses cris douloureux; la dame d’honneur qui
l’accompagne, agitée du plus violent désespoir, implore le secours du
Ciel, tandis que le bouffon de la Reine fait de vains efforts pour la
défendre contre la Mort, qui tient son sable élevé pour faire voir que
l’heure fatale est arrivée.


PLATE XXI.—THE DUTCHESS.

Death, in the shape of two hideous skeletons, comes to surprise her
as she is lying softly on an elegant bed. One of the skeletons awakes
her with the sound of a violin, while the other is pulling off her
bed-clothes, making frightful grimaces.


[Illustration: _De lectulo, super quem ascendisti, non descendes, sed
morte morieris. 4 Reg. i. 4._]


PLANCHE XXI.—LA DUCHESSE.

Sous la figure de deux sequelettes hideux, la Mort vient la surprendre,
mollement couchée sur un lit élégant. L’un des squelettes la réveille au
son d’un violon, tandis que l’autre lui arrache sa couverture en faisant
d’effroyables grimaces.


PLATE XXII.—THE COUNTESS.

She is wholly taken up with the care of her dress, and is receiving with
eagerness, from the hands of one of her maids, a very rich robe with a
gold chain. Death comes to derange her toilet, and has already, without
being perceived, slipped round her neck a collar made of small bones.


[Illustration: _Ducunt in bonis dies suos, et in puncto ad inferna
descendunt. Job xxi. 13._]


PLANCHE XXII.—LA COMTESSE.

Elle n’est occupée que du soin de sa parure, & reçoit avec empressement,
des mains d’une de ses femmes, un habillement très-riche avec une chaîne
d’or. La Mort vient troubler sa toilette, & lui a déjà passé autour du
cou, sans qu’elle s’en soit encore aperçue, un collier fait de petits os
de mort.


PLATE XXIII.—THE NEW-MARRIED PAIR.

In the first transports of an happy union, this tender couple appears
so wholly taken up with each other, and so inebriated with their mutual
happiness, that they neither see nor hear. Death, who is marching before
them, beating furiously on a little drum, is soon to give a cruel
interruption to their enjoyments.


[Illustration: _Sola mors me et te separaverit. Ruth i. 17._]


PLANCHE XXIII.—LES NOUVEAUX MARIES.

Dans les premiers transports d’une douce union, ces deux tendres époux
paroissent tellement occupés l’un de l’autre, ils sont si enivrés de leur
bonheur mutuel, qu’ils ne voient ni n’entendent la Mort qui marche devant
eux, en frappant vigoureusement sur un petit tambour, & qui va leur
donner bientôt un cruel trouble-fête.


PLATE XXIV.—THE CANONESS.

There appears in this young and beautiful recluse, a striking mixture
of gallantry and devotion. On her knees before a little altar, with her
rosary in her hand, she is amorously listening to the songs which a young
man, seated on a bed, addresses to her, accompanying them with his lute.
Death comes to put out the tapers burning on the altar, and to change
into sadness the pleasures of this conversation.


[Illustration: _Est via, quæ videtur homini justa: novissima autem ejus
deducunt hominem ad mortem. Prov. xiv. 12._]


PLANCHE XXIV.—LA CHANOINESSE.

L’on voit dans cette jeune & belle recluse un mélange frappant de
galanterie & de dévotion. Agenouillée devant un petit autel, son rosaire
à la main, elle écoute amoureusement les chansons qu’un jeune homme,
assis sur son lit, lui adresse en les accompagnant de son luth. La Mort
vient éteindre les cierges allumés sur l’autel, & changer en amertume les
douceurs de ce tête-à-tête.


PLATE XXV.—THE COUNT.

Death here adds to his usual employment that of avenger of oppressed
vassals. He is throwing with violence at the head of this Lord, his
coat of arms, the dear object of his pride, under the weight of which
he is ready to make him fall. He appears trampling under foot a flail,
to mark his inhumanity to labourers, a class of society so necessary
and respectable. On the ground also are to be seen the remains of the
helmet which formed the crest of his arms, with the other ornaments that
decorated them.


[Illustration: _Quoniam cum interierit, non sumet omnia: neque descendet
cum eo gloria ejus. Psal. xlvii. 18._]


PLANCHE XXV.—LE COMTE.

La Mort ajoute ici à l’exercice de son emploi accoutumé celui de vengeur
de vassaux opprimés; elle jette avec violence à la tête de ce Seigneur
ses armoiries, l’objet chéri de son orgueil, sous le poids desquelles
elle va le faire périr. On le voit fouler à ses pieds un fléau, pour
désigner son inhumanité envers les laboureurs, cette classe de la société
si nécessaire & si respectable; on peut encore remarquer à terre, les
débris du casque dont ces armoiries étoient surmontées avec d’autres
ornemens qui les décoroient.


PLATE XXVI.—THE KNIGHT.

This worthy Cavalier, returned victorious from so many combats and
tournaments, comes at length to meet his match. Death has run him through
the body with a furious stroke of the lance, and is laughing at the vain
efforts he makes to defend himself.


[Illustration: _Subito morientur, & in media nocte turbabuntur populi, &
auferent violentum absque manu. Job xxxiv. 20._]


PLANCHE XXVI.—LE CHEVALIER.

Ce preux Chevalier sorti vainqueur de tant de combats & de tant de
tournois, vient enfin de trouver son maître. La Mort l’a percé de part en
part d’un furieux coup de lance, & se rit des vains efforts qu’il met en
usage pour se défendre contr’elle.


PLATE XXVII.—THE GENTLEMAN.

He is doing every thing in his power to put off the moment that is to
separate him for ever from his possessions, and his fine seat, which
appears in the back ground; but Death inexorable has already set down
beside him the fatal bier, into which he is about to make him enter.


[Illustration: _Quis est homo, qui vivet, et non videbit mortem: eruet
animam suam de manu inferi? Psal. lxxxviii. 49._]


PLANCHE XXVII.—LE GENTILHOMME.

Il fait tout ce qu’il peut pour reculer le moment qui doit le séparer
pour toujours de ses possessions, & de son beau château qui paroît dans
le lointain; mais la Mort inexorable a déjà placé près de lui la bière
fatale où elle va le faire entrer.


PLATE XXVIII.—THE SWISS SOLDIER.

On a field of battle, covered with dead carcasses, Death, armed with a
buckler and a huge dart, attacks this warrior, in the bosom of victory,
escaped alone from the carnage of the day, and is giving him some
terrible blows. It is in vain that this brave Soldier, whose courage
seems invincible, is obstinately attempting to dispute the victory with
an irresistible adversary. In the back ground appears another Death,
running, and beating on a drum, who is followed by several soldiers.


[Illustration: _Cum fortis armatus custodit atrium suum, &c. Si autem
fortior eo superveniens vicerit eum, universa ejus arma auferet, in
quibus confidebat. Lucæ xi. 21, 22._]


PLANCHE XXVIII.—LE SOLDAT SUISSE.

Sur un champ de bataille jonché de cadavres, la Mort armée d’un bouclier
& d’un grand javelot, attaque dans le sein de la victoire ce guerrier
échappé seul au carnage, & lui port des coups terribles. C’est en vain
que ce brave Soldat dont la valeur sembloit indomptable, s’acharne à
disputer la victoire à un adversaire auquel rien ne sauroit résister.
Dans le lointain on apperçoit une autre Mort qui bat du tambour en
courrant, & qui est suivie de quelques soldats.


PLATE XXIX.—THE JUDGE.

It appears that this supporter of Justice, forgetting the dignity of his
station, abandons himself without shame to injustice. He is stretching
out his hand for the gold that the rich man is going to give him, without
doubt to obtain of him a favourable decision, and to bear down the poor
unfortunate man, who appears in a trembling posture at the side of the
Judge. Death comes to surprise him in the midst of his prevarications,
and is snatching out of his hands the rod which is the mark of his
dignity.


[Illustration: _Disperdam judicem de medio ejus. Amos ii. 3._]


PLANCHE XXIX.—LE JUGE.

Il paroît que ce suppôt de Thémis, oubliant la dignité de sa place,
s’abandonne sans pudeur à l’iniquité. Il tend la main à l’or que cet
homme riche va lui donner, sans doute pour en obtenir un jugement
favorable, & faire succomber le pauvre malheureux qu’on voit dans une
attitude craintive à côté du Juge. La Mort vient le surprendre au milieu
de ses prévarications, & lui arrache des mains la baguette qui est la
marque de sa dignité.


PLATE XXX.—THE COUNSELLOR.

This magistrate appears deeply engaged in giving, in the open street, to
a rich man, the advices which a little devil, astride on his neck, is
blowing into his ears, while he pays no sort of regard to the poor man,
who is tapping his shoulder, and in the most suppliant posture asking to
be heard. Death seems to be rising from the earth, in indignation, to put
an end to this interesting conversation.


[Illustration: _Qui obturat aurem suam ad clamorem pauperis, et ipse
clamabit, & non exaudietur. Prov. xxi. 13._]


PLANCHE XXX.—LE CONSEILLER.

Ce magistrat paroît fort occupé à donner en pleine rue à un homme riche,
des conseils qu’un petit diable à califourchon sur son cou lui souffle
aux oreilles, tandis qu’il ne fait aucune attention au pauvre qui lui
touche doucement l’épaule, & démande dans l’attitude la plus suppliante à
être écouté. La Mort indignée semble sortir de terre, pour mettre fin à
cette conversation intéressée.


PLATE XXXI.—THE ADVOCATE.

This subject answers to No. 29. The example of the Judge seems to
authorize the Advocate to get himself well paid for his prevarication,
and that even in the presence of his poor client, whose wretched
condition would raise compassion in any breast less obdurate than that of
the lawyer. But Death will avenge the oppressed; he is pouring into the
hands of the Advocate money in abundance, of which he will have little
use, for he is, at the same instant, shewing him, with an air of insult,
his sand run out.


[Illustration: _Callidus vidit malum, & abscondit, sed innocens
pertransiit & afflictus est damno. Prov. xxii. 3._]


PLANCHE XXXI.—L’AVOCAT.

Ce sujet se rapporte au No. 29. L’exemple du Juge semble autoriser
l’Avocat à se faire payer chèrement ses prévarications, & cela même en
présence de son pauvre client qui se tient dans un certain éloignement,
& dont l’état misérable feroit pitié à une âme moins dure que celle de
l’homme de loi. Mais la Mort vengera l’opprimé; elle verse abondamment
dans les mains de l’Avocat de l’argent dont il ne profitera guère, car
elle lui montre en même tems d’un air moqueur son sable écoulé.


PLATE XXXII.—THE MERCHANT.

Escaped from the dangers of the sea, and safely arrived in port, this
rich Merchant believes himself now in perfect safety; but he is mistaken.
Employed in counting his money, examining his goods, and treating about
their disposal, a bad customer, Death himself, comes up, and it is his
person only that he wants to bargain for.


[Illustration: _Qui congregat thesauros lingua mendacii, vanus et excors
est, & impingetur ad laqueos Mortis. Prov. xxi. 6._]


PLANCHE XXXII.—LE MARCHAND.

Echappé aux périls de la mer, arrivé heureusement au port, ce riche
Marchand se croit en pleine sécurité; il se trompe. Occupé à compter son
argent, à examiner ses marchandises & à traiter de leur vente, un mauvais
chaland, la Mort elle-même, arrive, & ce n’est que de sa personne qu’elle
veut faire emplette.


PLATE XXXIII.—THE HAWKER.

Bending under the weight of his load, he is advancing, with a quick pace,
to the neighbouring town, comforting himself with thinking on the gain
he is to make there; but Death, in the form of two skeletons, is come to
put a sudden end to his labours and his hopes. One of the skeletons is
dragging him forcibly by the arm, while the other behind him is playing
on a marine trumpet. It is in vain that the poor Hawker points with his
finger to the place where his business calls him; this disagreeable
company appears desirous of making him take another road.


[Illustration: _Venite ad me omnes, qui laboratis, et onerati estis.
Matth. xi. 28._]


PLANCHE XXXIII.—LE COLPORTEUR.

Courbé sous le poids de sa charge, il avance à grands pas vers le lieu
voisin, & trouve du soulagement en rêvant au gain qu’il pourroit y faire;
mais la Mort, sous la figure de deux squelettes, est venue subitement
mettre fin à ses peines & à ses espérances. L’un des squelettes le
tire avec force par le bras, tandis que l’autre joue derrière lui de
la trompette marine. C’est en vain que le pauvre Colporteur montre des
doigts l’endroit où ses affaires l’appellent, cette fâcheuse compagnie
paroît vouloir lui faire prendre une autre route.


PLATE XXXIV.—THE SHIPWRECK.

Death here is exercising his power on one of his most fertile domains. He
himself is breaking the mast of a ship violently tossed by the tempest,
and throws all the passengers into the most fearful despair. One alone
we can distinguish, near the mast, who preserves the tranquillity of
mind which, in the greatest danger, a good conscience yields to firm and
intrepid minds; his head has all the features with which Socrates is
usually represented.


[Illustration: _Qui volunt ditescere incidunt in tentationem & laqueum,
& cupiditates multas stultas & noxias, quæ demergunt homines in exitum &
interitum. 1 ad Timo. vi. 9._]


PLANCHE XXXIV.—LE NAUFRAGE.

La Mort exerce ici son empire sur un de ses plus fertiles domaines; elle
brise elle-même le mât d’un vaisseau violemment agité par la tempête, &
jette tous les passagers dans le plus affreux désespoir. On en distingue
un seul placé près du mât, qui a conservé cette tranquillité d’âme qu’une
bonne conscience accorde dans les plus grands périls aux esprits fermes
& courageux; sa tête a tous les traits sous lesquels on représente
ordinairement Socrate.


PLATE XXXV—THE WAGGONER.

We see Death here venting his capricious fury on a cart of wine that a
poor Waggoner is conducting. Without doubt, the man himself will soon
come, in his turn, to be the sport of his caprice; and the same cause
that has now produced, will ere long effectually finish his despair.


[Illustration: _Cæcus cæcum ducit: & ambo in foveam cadunt. Matth. xv.
14._]


PLANCHE XXXV.—LE VOITURIER.

On voit ici la Mort exercer ses bizarres fureurs sur un char de vin
que conduit un pauvre Voiturier. Sans doute que lui-même va devenir
à son tour le jouet de ses caprices, & que la même cause qui vient
d’occasionner son désespoir ne tardera pas à le terminer.


PLATE XXXVI.—THE HUSBANDMAN.

Were Death capable of considerations, what class of society would
better deserve to be exempted from his ravages, than the labourers;
incontestably the most useful, most laborious, and most productive of
real opulence? But he is now striking the horses harnessed to this
Husbandman’s plough; and this enemy of the human race can strike no
blow more severely felt, than by thus attacking it in the source of its
subsistence.


[Illustration: _In sudore vultus tui vesceris pane tuo. Gen. iii. 19._]


PLANCHE XXXVI.—LE LABOUREUR.

Si la Mort pouvoit user de quelque considération, quelle classe de la
société mériteroit mieux d’en être ménagée que celle du laboureur, sans
contredit la plus utile, la plus laborieuse, & la plus productive des
véritables richesses? Mais elle frappe déjà les chevaux attelés à la
charrue de ce Cultivateur, & cette ennemie du genre humain ne sauroit lui
porter des coups plus sensibles qu’en l’attaquant dans les sources de sa
subsistance.


PLATE XXXVII.—THE MISER.

The character of the Miser is very forcibly expressed in this sketch.
Shut up in a vault, which receives the light only through a wicket,
secured with a double grate of thick iron bars, he is entirely taken up
with his beloved treasure, a considerable part whereof Death is snatching
up before his eyes. This loss excites in him all the symptoms of the most
violent desperation, and it plainly appears that his gold is an hundred
times dearer to his heart than his life.


[Illustration: _Stulte, hac nocte repetunt animam tuam: & quæ parasti,
cujus erunt? Lucæ xii. 20._]


PLANCHE XXXVII.—L’AVARE.

Le caractère de l’Avare est rendu dans ce dessein avec beaucoup
d’énergie. Renfermé dans un caveau qui ne reçoit du jour que par une
lucarne garnie d’une double grille d’épais barreaux de fer, il n’est
occupé que de son cher trésor, dont la Mort lui enlève à ses yeux un
portion très-considérable. Cette perte excite en lui tous les symptômes
du plus violent désespoir, & l’on voit bien que son or lui tient cent
fois plus à cœur que la vie.


PLATE XXXVIII.—THE HIGHWAY ROBBER.

This ill-fated man attacks in a forest, a country girl returning from
the fair, and is endeavouring to take from her what she is bringing
from thence; but, fortunately for the poor woman, Death comes to her
assistance; and laying hold of the Robber, prevents, probably only by a
few days, the hangman, who would have made him bear on a scaffold the
punishment due to his crimes.


[Illustration: _Quasi agnus lasciviens & ignorans, nescit quod ad vincula
stultus trahatur. Prov. vii. 22._]


PLANCHE XXXVIII.—LE VOLEUR DE GRAND CHEMIN.

Ce malheureux attaque dans une forêt une paysanne qui revient de la
foire, & veut lui enlever ce qu’elle en rapporte; mais heureusement pour
la pauvre femme, la Mort vient à son secours, & en se saisissant du
Voleur elle ne prévient peut-être que de quelques jours le bourreau, qui
lui auroit fait porter sur un échaffaut la peine de ses crimes.


PLATE XXXIX.—THE DRUNKARDS.

Debauchery, and, above all, excess in drinking, undoubtedly furnish Death
with powerful arms for committing his ravages. Here he appears pouring
the wine in great abundance into the throat of one of these Drunkards,
and the most beastly drunkenness reigns in these disgusting orgies.


[Illustration: _Et nolite inebriari vino, in quo est luxuria. Eph. v.
18._]


PLANCHE XXXIX.—LES YVROGNES.

La débauche & surtout les excès de la boisson fournissent sans cesse à la
Mort des armes puissantes pour exercer ses ravages. On la voit ici qui
entonne le vin à grands flots dans le gozier d’un de ces Yvrognes, & la
plus grossière crapule préside à cette dégoûtante orgie.


PLATE XL.—THE GAMESTERS.

Here is another company well worthy of the former; and the fate of
those who compose it is nearly the same; it only differs in this, that
the Devil and Death are disputing which of them shall carry off the
losing Gamester. It is a contest, if we may say so, frightful as well as
ludicrous, so much the more so, that the second Gamester, interesting
himself in the fate of the first, is addressing fervent prayers to the
Devil on his behalf; but the third is doing still better, taking the
advantage of this moment of trouble and terror, to gather in the money
that is lying on the table.


[Illustration: _Quid enim prodest homini, si mundum universum lucretur,
animæ vero suæ detrimentum patiatur? Matth. xvi. 26._]


PLANCHE XL.—LES JOUEURS.

Voici une autre compagnie bien digne de la précédente; aussi le sort de
ceux qui la composent est-il à peu près le même; il ne diffère qu’en ce
que le Diable & la Mort se disputent qui des deux emportera le Joueur qui
a perdu. C’est un combat, s’il est permis de le dire, aussi effroyable
que comique, d’autant plus que le second Joueur, s’intéressant au sort
du premier, adresse de ferventes prières au Diable en sa faveur; mais
le troisième fait encore mieux, & profite de ce moment de trouble &
d’effroi, pour ramasser l’argent qui se trouve sur la table.


PLATE XLI.—THE OLD MAN.

Here we see Death leading away, playing on a psaltery, an Old Man to the
brink of the grave, bent under the load of years, and verging to the last
degree of frailty. The Old Man allows himself to be carried off, with
that calmness and tranquillity, which are the effects of wisdom, and the
fruits of a good conscience.


[Illustration: _Spiritus meus attenuabitur, dies mei breviabuntur, &
solum mihi superest sepulchrum. Job xvii. 1._]


PLANCHE XLI.—LE VIEILLARD.

L’on voit ici la Mort qui conduit sur le bord de sa fosse, en jouant du
psalterion, un Vieillard courbé sous le poids des années, & parvenu au
dernier degré de la caducité. Le Vieillard se laisse emmener avec ce
calme & cette tranquillité qui sont l’apanage de la sagesse & les fruits
d’une bonne conscience.


PLATE XLII.—THE OLD WOMAN.

The grim countenance of this good old Dame does not indicate the same
resignation as appears in the former subject. Wholly occupied in mumbling
her rosary, she pays no attention to the sound of a dulcimer, on which
one of her conductors is playing. The other skeleton, impatient of the
slowness of the Old Woman’s march, is employing menaces and blows to make
her advance.


[Illustration: _Melior est mors quam vita. Eccle. xxx. 17._]


PLANCHE XLII.—LA VIEILLE.

Le visage rechigné de cette bonne Vieille n’annonce pas la même
résignation que dans le sujet précédent. Toute occupée à marmotter son
rosaire, elle ne prête aucune attention au son du timpanon dont joue
l’une de ses conductrices. L’autre squelette impatient de la lenteur que
la bonne Vieille met dans sa marche, emploie les menaces & les coups pour
la faire avancer.


PLATE XLIII.—THE BLIND MAN.

This poor Blind Man is following, with an air of chagrin, his new
conductor, who, without pity, is leading him through wretched roads. In
vain does he attempt, by groping his way, to avoid the obstacles that
oppose his reluctant march; he will not avoid that fatal goal to which
Death is conducting him, and which will be the only termination of his
evils.


[Illustration: _Domine vim patior. Isaiæ xxxviii. 14._

_Cæci sunt, & duces cæcorum. Cæcus autem si cæco ducatum præstet, ambo in
foveam cadunt. Matth. xv. 14._]


PLANCHE XLIII.—L’AVEUGLE.

Ce pauvre Aveugle suit d’un air chagrin son nouveau conducteur qui le
mène impitoyablement par les plus mauvais chemins; en vain veut-il
éviter, en tâtonnant, les obstacles qui s’opposent à sa marche forcée; il
n’évitera pas le terme fatal où la Mort le conduit, et qui ne sera dans
le fond que celui de ses maux.


PLATE XLIV.—THE BEGGAR.

In the most deplorable situation, lame, and exposed almost naked to the
injuries of the weather, he is set down before a rich man’s house, into
which he has the mortification to see several enter, who look at him
without ever thinking of relieving his distress. Death, not less cruel
than capricious, whose aid alone he implores, and in whose power it is to
make him happy, deaf to his prayers, allows him to groan under the load
of evils which overwhelm him, whilst he delights to tear from this life
those who think themselves happy, or are attached to it by the strongest
ties.


[Illustration: _Corruit in curru suo. Chron. xxii._]


PLANCHE XLIV.—LE MENDIANT.

Dans l’état le plus déplorable, estropié, exposé presque nud aux injures
du tems, il est assis devant la maison d’un homme opulent, dans laquelle
il a la douleur de voir entrer plusieurs personnes qui le regardent sans
songer à soulager ses peines. La Mort non moins cruelle que bizarre, dont
lui seul implore le secours, & qui pourroit faire son bonheur, sourde
à ses prières, le laisse gémir sous le poids des maux qui l’accablent,
tandis qu’elle se plaît à arracher de cette vie ceux qui s’y croient
heureux, ou qui y tiennent par les liens les plus puissans.


PLATE XLV.—THE CHILD.

If under the roof of poverty there is any comfort, it is in having
children, by whom we may hope one day to be solaced. This is the case
with this poor widow; but death is of a different opinion, and is come to
carry off her youngest Child, unmoved by her prayers and lamentations.


[Illustration: _Homo natus de muliere, brevi vivens tempore, repletur
multis miseriis: qui quasi flos egreditur & conteritur, & fugit velut
umbra. Job xiv. 1, 2._]


PLANCHE XLV.—L’ENFANT.

Si sous le toit de la pauvreté il y a quelque consolation, c’est d’avoir
des enfans dont on peut espérer d’être un jour soulagé. C’est le cas de
cette pauvre veuve, mais la Mort n’est point de cet avis, & vient de lui
enlever le plus petit sans se laisser fléchir, ni par ses prières ni par
ses lamentations.


PLATE XLVI.—THE FOOL.

Death is leading him away gaily, making him dance to the sound of a
bagpipe. The Fool, ignorant without doubt of the catastrophe that awaits
him, seems to be meditating some piece of mischief, which will probably
be his last.

This dancing couple finish the procession, wherein HOLBEIN has had the
skill to unite a salutary moral with the gayest and liveliest sallies
that form a singular contrast with the sadness of the subject.


[Illustration: _Quasi agnus lasciviens, & ignorans quod ad vincula
stultus trahatur. Prov. vii. 22._]


PLANCHE XLVI.—LE FOU.

La Mort l’emmène gaiement en le faisant danser au son d’une cornemuse;
le Fou qui ne sait pas sans doute la catastrophe qui l’attend, paroît
méditer une malice qui sera vraisemblablement la dernière.

Ce couple dansant termine la marche de cette suite où HOLBEIN a su réunir
une morale salutaire, aux sallies les plus gaies & les plus plaisantes
qui contrastent singulièrement avec la tristesse du sujet.


THE END.

W. SMITH AND CO. Printers, KING STREET, SEVEN DIALS.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Dances of Death, by John Holbein

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DANCES OF DEATH ***

***** This file should be named 58808-0.txt or 58808-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/8/8/0/58808/

Produced by Chris Curnow and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

