The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Inner Beauty, by Maurice Maeterlinck

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Inner Beauty

Author: Maurice Maeterlinck

Release Date: January 10, 2011 [EBook #34910]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE INNER BEAUTY ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Martin Pettit and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






_The Inner Beauty_

_By_

_Maurice Maeterlinck_

[Illustration: Decoration]

_New York_

_A. L. Chatterton Company_




THE INNER BEAUTY


Nothing in the whole world is so athirst for beauty as the soul, nor is
there anything to which beauty clings so readily.

There is nothing in the world capable of such spontaneous uplifting, of
such speedy ennoblement; nothing that offers more scrupulous obedience
to the pure and noble commands it receives.

There is nothing in the world that yields deeper submission to the
empire of a thought that is loftier than other thoughts. And on this
earth of ours there are but few souls that can withstand the dominion
of the soul that has suffered itself to become beautiful.

In all truth might it be said that beauty is the unique aliment of our
soul, for in all places does it search for beauty, and it perishes not
of hunger even in the most degraded of lives. For indeed nothing of
beauty can pass by and be altogether unperceived. Perhaps does it never
pass by save only in our unconsciousness, but its action is no less
puissant in gloom of night than by light of day; the joy it procures may
be less tangible, but other difference there is none.

Look at the most ordinary of men, at a time when a little beauty has
contrived to steal into their darkness. They have come together, it
matters not where, and for no special reason; but no sooner are they
assembled than their very first thought would seem to be to close the
great doors of life. Yet has each one of them, when alone, more than
once lived in accord with his soul. He has loved perhaps, of a surety he
has suffered. Inevitably must he, too, have heard the sounds that come
from the distant country of Splendor and Terror, and many an evening has
he bowed down in silence before laws that are deeper than the sea. And
yet when these men are assembled it is with the basest of things that
they love to debauch themselves. They have a strange indescribable fear
of beauty, and as their number increases so does this fear become
greater, resembling indeed their dread of silence or of a verity that is
too pure. And so true is this that, were one of them to have done
something heroic in the course of the day, he would ascribe wretched
motives to his conduct, thereby endeavoring to find excuses for it, and
these motives would lie readily to his hand in that lower region where
he and his fellows were assembled.

And yet listen: a proud and lofty word has been spoken, a word that has
in a measure undammed the springs of life. For one instant has a soul
dared to reveal itself, even such as it is in love and sorrow, such as
it is in face of death and in the solitude that dwells around the stars
of night. Disquiet prevails, on some faces there is astonishment, others
smile. But have you never felt at moments such as those how unanimous is
the fervor wherewith every soul admires, and how unspeakably even the
very feeblest, from the remotest depths of its dungeon, approves the
word it has recognized as akin to itself? For they have all suddenly
sprung to life again in the primitive and normal atmosphere that is
their own; and could you but hearken with angels' ears, I doubt not but
you would hear mightiest applause in that kingdom of amazing radiance
wherein the souls do dwell.

Do you not think that even the most timid of them would take courage
unto themselves were but similar words to be spoken every evening? Do
you not think that men would live purer lives? And yet though the word
come not again, still will something momentous have happened, that must
leave still more momentous trace behind. Every evening will its sisters
recognize the soul that pronounced the word, and henceforth, be the
conversation never so trivial, its mere presence will, I know not how,
add thereto something of majesty. Whatever else betide, there has been a
change that we cannot determine. No longer will such absolute power be
vested in the baser side of things, and henceforth, even the most
terror-stricken of souls will know that there is somewhere a place of
refuge....

Certain it is that the natural and primitive relationship of soul to
soul is a relationship of beauty. For beauty is the only language of our
soul; none other is known to it. It has no other life, it can produce
nothing else, in nothing else can it take interest. And therefore it is
that the most oppressed, nay, the most degraded of souls--if it may
truly be said that a soul can be degraded--immediately hail with
acclamation every thought, every word or deed, that is great and
beautiful.

Beauty is the only element wherewith the soul is organically connected,
and it has no other standard of judgment. This is brought home to us at
every moment of our life, and is no less evident to the man by whom
beauty may more than once have been denied than to him who is ever
seeking it in his heart. Should a day come when you stand in profoundest
need of another's sympathy, would you go to him who was wont to greet
the passage of beauty with a sneering smile? Would you go to him whose
shake of the head had sullied a generous action or a mere impulse that
was pure? Even though perhaps you had been of those who commended him,
you would none the less, when it was truth that knocked at your door,
turn to the man who had known how to prostrate himself and love. In its
very depths had your soul passed its judgment, and it is the silent and
unerring judgment that will rise to the surface, after thirty years
perhaps, and send you towards a sister who shall be more truly you than
you are yourself, for that she has been nearer to beauty.... There needs
but so little to encourage beauty in our soul; so little to awaken the
slumbering angels; or perhaps is there no need of awakening--it is
enough that we lull them not to sleep.

It requires more effort to fall, perhaps, than to rise.

Can we, without putting constraint upon ourselves, confine our thoughts
to everyday things at times when the sea stretches before us, and we are
face to face with the night? And what soul is there but knows that it
is ever confronting the sea, ever in presence of an eternal night?

Did we but dread beauty less it would come about that nought else in
life would be visible; for in reality it is beauty that underlies
everything, it is beauty alone that exists. There is no soul but is
conscious of this, none that is not in readiness; but where are those
that hide not their beauty? And yet must one of them "begin." Why not
dare to be the one to "begin." The others are all watching eagerly
around us like little children in front of a marvelous place. They press
upon the threshold, whispering to each other and peering through every
crevice, but there is not one who dares put his shoulder to the door.
They are all waiting for some grown-up person to come and fling it
open. But hardly ever does such a one pass by.

And yet what is needed to become the grown-up person for whom they lie
in wait? So little! The soul is not exacting. A thought that is almost
beautiful--a thought that you speak not, but that you cherish within you
at this moment, will irradiate you as though you were a transparent
vase. They will see it and their greeting to you will be very different
than had you been meditating how best to deceive your brother.

We are surprised when certain men tell us that they have never come
across real ugliness, that they cannot conceive that a soul can be base.

Yet need there be no cause for surprise. These men had "begun." They
themselves had been the first to be beautiful, and had therefore
attracted all the beauty that passed by, as a lighthouse attracts the
vessels from the four corners of the horizon. But there are those who
complain of women, for instance, never dreaming that, the first time a
man meets a woman, a single word or thought that denies the beautiful or
profound will be enough to poison for ever his existence in her soul.
"For my part," said a sage to me one day, "I have never come across a
single woman who did not bring to me something that was great." He was
great himself first of all; therein lay his secret.

There is one thing only that the soul can never forgive; it is to have
been compelled to behold, or share, or pass close to an ugly action,
word, or thought. It cannot forgive, for forgiveness here were but the
denial of itself.

And yet with the generality of men, ingenuity, strength and skill do but
imply that the soul must first of all be banished from their life, and
that every impulse that lies too deep must be carefully brushed aside.
Even in love do they act thus, and therefore, it is that the woman, who
is so much nearer the truth, can scarcely ever live a moment of the true
life with them. It is as though men dreaded the contact of their soul,
and were anxious to keep its beauty at immeasurable distance. Whereas,
on the contrary, we should endeavor to move in advance of ourselves.

If at this moment you think or say something that is too beautiful to be
true in you--if you have but endeavored to think or say it to-day, on
the morrow it will be true. We must try to be more beautiful than
ourselves; we shall never distance our soul.

We can never err when it is question of silent or hidden beauty.
Besides, so long as the spring within us be limpid, it matters but
little whether error there be or not. But do any of us ever dream of
making the slightest unseen effort? And yet in the domain where we are
everything is effective, for that everything is waiting.

All the doors are unlocked, we have but to push them open, and the
palace is full of manacled queens.

A single word will very often suffice to clear the mountain of refuse.

Why not have the courage to meet a base question with a noble answer? Do
you imagine it would pass quite unnoticed or merely arouse surprise? Do
you not think it would be more akin to the discourse that would
naturally be held between two souls? We know not where it may give
encouragement, where freedom. Even he who rejects your word will, in
spite of himself, have taken a step towards the beauty that is within
him.

Nothing of beauty dies without having purified something, nor can aught
of beauty be lost. Let us not be afraid of sowing it along the road. It
may remain there for weeks or years, but like the diamond it cannot
dissolve, and finally there will pass by some one whom its glitter will
attract; he will pick it up and go his way, rejoicing. Then why keep
back a lofty, beautiful word, for that you doubt whether others will
understand? An instant of higher goodness was impending over you; why
hinder its coming, even though you believe not that those about you will
profit thereby? What if you are among men of the valley, is that
sufficient reason for checking the instinctive movement of your soul
towards the mountain peaks? Does darkness rob deep feeling of its power?

Have the blind nought but their eyes wherewith to distinguish those who
love them from those who love them not? Can the beauty not exist that is
not understood, and is there not in every man something that does
understand--in regions far beyond what he seems to understand, far
beyond, too, what he believes he understands? "Even to the very
wretchedest of all," said to me one day the loftiest minded creature it
has ever been my happiness to know, "even to the very wretchedest of
all I never have the courage to say anything in reply that is ugly or
mediocre." I have for a long time followed that man's life, and have
seen the inexplicable power he exercised over the most obscure, the most
unapproachable, the blindest, even the most rebellious of souls. For no
tongue can tell the power of a soul that strives to live in an
atmosphere of beauty, and is actively beautiful in itself. And indeed is
it not the quality of this activity that renders life either miserable
or divine?

If we could but probe to the root of things it might well be discovered
that it is by the strength of some souls that are beautiful that others
are sustained in life.

Is it not the idea we each form of certain chosen ones that constitutes
the only living, effective morality? But in this idea how much is there
of the soul that is chosen, how much of him who chooses?

Do not these things blend very mysteriously, and does not this ideal
morality lie infinitely deeper than the morality of the most beautiful
books? A far-reaching influence exists therein whose limits it is indeed
difficult to define, and a fountain of strength whereat we all of us
drink many times a day. Would not any weakness in one of those creatures
whom you thought perfect, and loved in the region of beauty, at once
lessen your confidence in the universal greatness of things, and would
your admiration for them suffer?

And again, I doubt whether anything in the world can beautify a soul
more spontaneously, more naturally, than the knowledge that somewhere in
its neighborhood there exists a pure and noble being whom it can
unreservedly love. When the soul has veritably drawn near to such a
being, beauty is no longer a lovely, lifeless thing, that one exhibits
to the stranger, for it suddenly takes unto itself an imperious
existence, and its activity becomes so natural as to be henceforth
irresistible. Wherefore you will do well to think it over, for none are
alone, and those who are good must watch.

Plotinus, in the eighth book of the fifth "Ennead," after speaking of
the beauty that is "intelligible"--_i. e._ divine--concludes thus: "As
regards ourselves, we are beautiful when we belong to ourselves, and
ugly when we lower ourselves to our inferior nature. Also are we
beautiful when we know such knowledge." Bear it in mind, however, that
here we are on the mountains, where not to know oneself means far more
than mere ignorance of what takes place within us at moments of jealousy
or love, fear or envy, happiness or unhappiness. Here not to know
oneself means to be unconscious of all the divine that throbs in man.

As we wander from the gods within us so does ugliness enwrap us; as we
discover them, so do we become more beautiful. But it is only by
revealing the divine that is in us that we may discover the divine in
others.

Needs must one god beckon to another, and no signal is so imperceptible
but they will every one of them respond. It cannot be said too often
that, be the crevice never so small, it will yet suffice for all the
waters of heaven to pour into our soul.

Every cup is stretched out to the unknown spring, and we are in a
region where none think of aught but beauty.

If we could ask of an angel what it is that our souls do in the shadow,
I believe the angel would answer, after having looked for many years
perhaps, and seen far more than the things the soul seems to do in the
eyes of men, "They transform into beauty all the little things that are
given to them." Ah! we must admit that the human soul is possessed of
singular courage! Resignedly does it labor, its whole life long, in the
darkness whither most of us relegate it, where it is spoken to by none.
There, never complaining, does it do all that in its power lies,
striving to tear from out the pebbles we fling to it the nucleus of
eternal light that peradventure they contain. And in the midst of its
work it is ever lying in wait for the moment when it may show, to a
sister who is more tenderly cared for, or who chances to be nearer, the
treasures it has so toilfully amassed.

But thousands of existences there are that no sister visits; thousands
of existences wherein life has infused such timidity into the soul that
it departs without saying a word, without even once having been able to
deck itself with the humblest jewels of its humble crown....

And yet, in spite of all, does it watch over everything from out its
invisible heaven. It warns and loves, it admires, attracts, repels. At
every fresh event does it rise to the surface, where it lingers till it
be thrust down again, being looked upon as wearisome and insane. It
wanders to and fro, like Cassandra at the gates of the Atrides. It is
ever giving utterance to words of shadowy truth, but there are none to
listen. When we raise our eyes it yearns for a ray of sun or star, that
it may weave into a thought, or, haply, an impulse, which shall be
unconscious and very pure. And if our eyes bring it nothing, still will
it know how to turn its pitiful disillusion into something ineffable,
that it will conceal even till its death.

When we love, how eagerly does it drink in the light from behind the
closed door--keen with expectation, it yet wastes not a minute, and the
light that steals through the apertures becomes beauty and truth to the
soul. But if the door open not (and how many lives are there wherein it
does open?) it will go back into its prison, and its regret will
perhaps be a loftier verity that shall never be seen, for we are now in
the region of transformations whereof none may speak; and though nothing
born this side of the door can be lost, yet does it never mingle with
our life....

I said just now that the soul changed into beauty the little things we
gave to it. It would even seem, the more we think of it, that the soul
has no other reason for existence, and that all its activity is consumed
in amassing, at the depths of us, a treasure of indescribable beauty.
Might not everything naturally turn into beauty, were we not unceasingly
interrupting the arduous labors of our soul? Does not evil itself become
precious so soon as it has gathered therefrom the deep lying diamond of
repentance? The acts of injustice whereof you have been guilty, the
tears you have caused to flow, will not these end too by becoming so
much radiance and love in your soul? Have you ever cast your eyes into
this kingdom of purifying flame that is within you?

Perhaps a great wrong may have been done you to-day, the act itself
being mean and disheartening, the mode of action of the basest, and
ugliness wrapped you round as your tears fell. But let some years
elapse, then give one look into your soul, and tell me whether, beneath
the recollection of that act, you see not something that is already
purer than thought; an indescribable, unnameable force that has nought
in common with the forces of this world; a mysterious inexhaustible
spring of the other life, whereat you may drink for the rest of your
days.

And yet will you have rendered no assistance to the untiring queen;
other thoughts will have filled your mind, and it will be without your
knowledge that the act will have been purified in the silence of your
being, and will have flown into the precious waters that lie in the
great reservoir of truth and beauty, which, unlike the shallower
reservoir of true or beautiful thoughts, has an ever unruffled surface,
and remains for all time out of reach of the breath of life.

Emerson tells us that there is not an act or event in our life but,
sooner or later, casts off its outer shell, and bewilders us by its
sudden flights from the very depths of us, on high into the empyrean.
And this is true to a far greater extent than Emerson had foreseen, for
the further we advance in these regions, the diviner are the spheres we
discover.

We can form no adequate conception of what this silent activity of the
souls that surround us may really mean. Perhaps you have spoken a pure
word to one of your fellows by whom it has not been understood. You look
upon it as lost and dismiss it from your mind. But one day,
peradventure, the word comes up again extraordinarily transformed, and
revealing the unexpected fruit it has borne in the darkness; then
silence once more falls over all. But it matters not; we have learned
that nothing can be lost in the soul, and that even to the very pettiest
there come moments of splendor.

It is unmistakably borne home to us that even the unhappiest and the
most destitute of men have at the depths of their being and in spite of
themselves a treasure of beauty that they cannot despoil. They have but
to acquire the habit of dipping into this treasurer. It suffices not
that beauty should keep solitary festival in life; it has to become a
festival of every day.

There needs no great effort to be admitted into the ranks of those
"whose eyes no longer behold earth in flower and sky in glory in
infinitesimal fragments, but indeed in sublime masses," and I speak here
of flowers and sky that are purer and more lasting than those that we
behold.

Thousands of channels there are through which the beauty of our soul may
sail even unto our thoughts. Above all is there the wonderful, central
channel of love.

Is it not in love that are found the purest elements of beauty that we
can offer to the soul?

Some there are who do thus in beauty love each other. And to love thus
means that, little by little, the sense of ugliness is lost; that one's
eyes are closed to all the littlenesses of life, to all but the
freshness and virginity of the very humblest of souls. Loving thus, we
have no longer even the need to forgive. Loving thus, we can no longer
have anything to conceal, for that the ever-present soul transforms all
things into beauty. It is to behold evil in so far only as it purifies
indulgence, and teaches us no longer to confound the sinner with his
sin. Loving thus do we raise on high within ourselves all those about
us who have attained an eminence where failure has become impossible;
heights whence a paltry action has so far to fall that, touching earth,
it is compelled to yield up its diamond soul.

It is to transform, though all unconsciously, the feeblest intention
that hovers about us into illimitable movement. It is to summon all that
is beautiful in earth, heaven or soul, to the banquet of love.

Loving thus, we do indeed exist before our fellows as we exist before
God. It means that the least gesture will call forth the presence of the
soul with all its treasure. No longer is there need of death, disaster
or tears for that the soul shall appear; a smile suffices.

Loving thus, we perceive truth in happiness as profoundly as some of
the heroes perceived it in the radiance of greatest sorrow. It means
that the beauty that turns into love is undistinguishable from the love
that turns into beauty. It means to be able no longer to tell where the
ray of a star leaves off and the kiss of an ordinary thought begins. It
means to have come so near to God that the angels possess us.

Loving thus, the same soul will have been so beautified by us all that
it will become, little by little, the "unique angel" mentioned by
Swedenborg. It means that each day will reveal to us a new beauty in
that mysterious angel, and that we shall walk together in a goodness
that shall ever become more and more living, loftier and loftier. For
there exists also a lifeless beauty, made up of the past alone; but the
veritable love renders the past useless, and its approach creates a
boundless future of goodness, without disaster and without tears.

To love thus is but to free one's soul, and to become as beautiful as
the soul thus freed. "If, in the emotion that this spectacle cannot fail
to awaken in thee," says the great Plotinus, when dealing with kindred
matters--and of all the intellects known to me that of Plotinus draws
the nearest to the divine--"If in the emotion that this spectacle cannot
fail to awaken in thee, thou proclaimest not that it is beautiful; and
if, plunging thine eyes into thyself, thou dost not then feel the charm
of beauty, it is in vain that, thy disposition being such, thou shouldst
seek the intelligible beauty; for thou wouldst seek it only with that
which is ugly and impure. Therefore it is that the discourse we hold
here is not addressed to all men. But if thou hast recognized beauty
within thyself, see that thou rise to the recollection of the
intelligible beauty."




THE INVISIBLE GOODNESS


It is a thing, said to me one evening the sage I had chanced to meet by
the sea shore, whereon the waves were breaking almost noiselessly--it is
a thing that we scarcely notice, that none seem to take into account,
and yet do I conceive it to be one of the forces that safeguard mankind.
In a thousand diverse ways do the gods from whom we spring reveal
themselves within us, but it may well be that this unnoticed secret
goodness, to which sufficiently direct allusion has never yet been made,
is the purest token of their eternal life. Whence it comes we know not.
It is there in its simplicity, smiling on the threshold of our soul;
and those in whom its smiles lies deepest, or shine forth most
frequently, may make us suffer day and night and they will, yet shall it
be beyond our power to cease to love them....

It is not of this world, and still are there few agitations of ours in
which it takes not part. It cares not to reveal itself even in look or
tear. Nay, it seeks concealment, for reasons one cannot divine. It is as
though it were afraid to make use of its power. It knows that its most
involuntary movement will cause immortal things to spring to life about
it; and we are miserly with immortal things. Why are we so fearful lest
we exhaust the heaven within us? We dare not act upon the whisper of the
God who inspires us. We are afraid of everything that cannot be
explained by word or gesture; and we shut our eyes to all that we do,
ourselves notwithstanding, in the empire where explanations are vain!

Whence comes the timidity of the divine in man? For truly might it be
said that the nearer a movement of our soul approaches the divine, so
much the more scrupulously do we conceal it from the eyes of our
brethren. Can it be that man is nothing but a frightened god? Or has the
command been laid upon us that the superior powers must not be betrayed?
Upon all that does not form part of this too visible world there rests
the tender meekness of the little ailing girl, for whom her mother will
not send when strangers come to the house.

And therefore it is that this secret goodness of ours has never yet
passed through the silent portals of our soul. It lives within us like a
prisoner forbidden to approach the barred window of her cell. But
indeed, what matter though it do not approach? Enough that it be there.
Hide as it may, let it but raise its head, move a link of its chain or
open its hand, and the prison is illumined, the pressure of radiance
from within bursts open the iron barrier, and then, suddenly, there
yawns a gulf between words and beings, a gulf peopled with agitated
angels; silence falls over all: the eyes turn away for a moment and two
souls embrace tearfully on the threshold....

It is not a thing that comes from this earth of ours, and all
descriptions can be of no avail. They who would understand must have, in
themselves too, the same point of sensibility. If you have never in
your life felt the power of your invisible goodness, go no further; it
would be useless. But are there really any who have not felt this power,
and have the worst of us never been invisibly good? I know not: of so
many in this world does the aim seem to be the discouragement of the
divine in their soul. And yet there needs but one instant of respite for
the divine to spring up again, and even the wickedest are not
incessantly on their guard; and hence doubtless has it arisen that so
many of the wicked are good, unseen of all, whereas divers saints and
sages are not invisibly good....

More than once have I been the cause of suffering, he went on, even as
each being is the cause of suffering about him.

I have caused suffering because we are in a world where all is held
together by invisible threads, in a world where none are alone, and
where the gentlest gesture of love or kindliness may so often wound the
innocence by our side!--

I have caused suffering, too, because there are times when the best and
tenderest are impelled to seek I know not what part of themselves in the
grief of others. For, indeed, there are seeds that only spring up in our
soul beneath the rain of tears shed because of us, and none the less do
these seeds produce good flowers and salutary fruit. What would you? It
is no law of our making, and I know not whether I would dare to love the
man who had made no one weep.

Frequently, indeed, will the greatest suffering be caused by those
whose love is greatest, for a strange, timid, tender cruelty is most
often the anxious sister of love. On all sides does love search for the
proofs of love, and the first proofs--who is not prone to discover them
in the tears of the beloved?

Even death could not suffice to reassure the lover who dared to give ear
to the unreasoning claims of love; for to the intimate cruelty of love,
the instant of death seems too brief; over beyond death there is yet
room for a sea of doubts, and even in those who die together may
disquiet still linger as they die. Long, slowly falling tears are needed
here. Grief is love's first food, and every love that has not been fed
on a little pure suffering must die like the babe that one had tried to
nourish on the nourishment of a man. Will the love inspired by the
woman who always brought the smile to your lips be quite the same as the
love you feel for her who at times called forth your tears? Alas! needs
must love weep, and often indeed is it at the very moment when the sobs
burst forth that love's chains are forged and tempered for life....

Thus, he continued, I have caused suffering because I loved, and also
have I caused suffering because I did not love--but how great was the
difference in the two cases! In the one the slowly dropping tears of
well-tried love seemed already to know, at the depths of them, that they
were bedewing all that was ineffable in our united souls; in the other
the poor tears knew that they were falling in solitude on a desert. But
it is at those very moments when the soul is all ear--or, haply, all
soul--that I have recognized the might of an invisible goodness that
could offer to the wretched tears of an expiring love the divine
illusions of a love on the eve of birth. Has there never come to you one
of those sorrowful evenings when dejection lay heavy upon your unsmiling
kisses, and it at length dawned upon your soul that it had been
mistaken? With direst difficulty did your words ring forth in the cold
air of the separation that was to be final; you were about to part for
ever, and your almost lifeless hands were outstretched for the farewell
of a departure that should know no return, when suddenly your soul made
an imperceptible movement within itself. On that instant did the soul by
the side of you awake on the summits of its being; something sprang to
life in regions loftier far than the love of jaded lovers; and for all
that the bodies might shrink asunder, henceforth would the souls never
forget that for an instant they had beheld each other high above
mountains they had never seen, and that for a second's space they had
been good with a goodness they had never known until that day....

What can this be, this mysterious movement that I speak of here in
connection with love only, but which may well take place in the smallest
events of life? Is it I know not what sacrifice or inner embrace, is it
the profoundest desire to be soul for a soul, or the consciousness, ever
quickening within us, of the presence of a life that is invisible, but
equal to our own? Is it all that is admirable and sorrowful in the mere
act of living that, at such moments, floods our being--is it the aspect
of life, one and indivisible? I know not; but in truth it is then that
we feel that there lurks, somewhere, an unknown force; it is then that
we feel that we are the treasures of an unknown God who loves all, that
not a gesture of this God may pass unperceived, and that we are at
length in the regions of things that do not betray themselves....

Certain it is that, from the day of our birth to the day of our death,
we never emerge from this clearly defined region, but wander in God like
helpless sleep-walkers, or like the blind who despairingly seek the very
temple in which they do indeed befind themselves. We are there in life,
man against man, soul against soul, and day and night are spent under
arms. We never see each other, we never touch each other. We see
nothing but bucklers and helmets, we touch nothing but iron and brass.
But let a tiny circumstance, come from the simpleness of the sky, for
one instant only cause the weapons to fall, are there not always tears
beneath the helmet, childlike smiles behind the buckler, and is not
another verity revealed?

He thought for a moment, then went on, more sadly: A woman--as I believe
I told you just now--a woman to whom I had caused suffering against my
will--for the most careful of us scatter suffering around them without
their knowledge--a woman to whom I had caused suffering against my will,
revealed to me one evening the sovereign power of this invisible good.
To be good we must needs have suffered; but perhaps it is necessary to
have caused suffering before we can become better. This was brought
home to me that evening. I felt that I had arrived, alone, at that sad
zone of kisses when it seems to us that we are visiting the hovels of
the poor, while she, who had lingered on the road, was still smiling in
the palace of the first days. Love, as men understand it, was dying
between us like a child stricken with a disease come one knows not
whence, a disease that has no pity. We said nothing. It would be
impossible for me to recall what my thoughts were at that earnest
moment. They were doubtless of no significance. I was probably thinking
of the last face I had seen, of the quivering gleam of a lantern at a
deserted street corner; and, nevertheless, everything took place in a
light a thousand times purer, a thousand times higher, than had there
intervened all the forces of pity and love which I command in my
thoughts and my heart. We parted, and not a word was spoken, but at one
and the same moment had we understood our inexpressible thought. We know
now that another love had sprung to life, a love that demands not the
words, the little attentions and smiles of ordinary love. We have never
met again. Perhaps centuries will elapse before we ever do meet again.


       "Much is to learn, much to forget,
       Through worlds I shall traverse not a few."

     before we shall again find ourselves in the same movement of the
     soul as on that evening: but we can well afford to wait....


And thus, ever since that day, have I greeted, in all places, even in
the very bitterest of moments, the beneficent presence of this
marvellous power. He who has but once clearly seen it, shall never again
find it possible to turn away from its face. You will often behold it
smiling in the last retreat of hatred, in the depths of the cruellest
tears. And yet does it not reveal itself to the eyes of the body. Its
nature changes from the moment that it manifests itself by means of an
exterior act; and we are no longer in the truth according to the soul,
but in a kind of falsehood as conceived by man. Goodness and love that
are self-conscious have no influence on the soul, for they have departed
from the kingdoms where they have their dwelling; but, do they only
remain blind, they can soften Destiny itself. I have known more than
one man who performed every act of kindness and mercy without touching a
single soul; and I have known others; who seemed to live in falsehood
and injustice, yet were no souls driven from them nor did any for an
instant even believe that these men were not good. Nay, more, even those
who do not know you, who are merely told of your acts of goodness and
deeds of love--if you be not good according to the invisible goodness,
these, even, will feel that something is lacking, and they will never be
touched in the depths of their being. One might almost believe that
there exists, somewhere, a place where all is weighed in the presence of
the spirits, or perhaps, out yonder, the other side of the night, a
reservoir of certitudes whither the silent herd of souls flock every
morning to slake their thirst.

Perhaps we do not yet know what the word "to love" means. There are
within us lives in which we love unconsciously. To love thus means more
than to have pity, to make inner sacrifices, to be anxious to help and
give happiness; it is a thing that lies a thousand fathoms deeper, where
our softest, swiftest, strongest words cannot reach it. At moments we
might believe it to be a recollection, furtive, but excessively keen, of
the great primitive unity. There is in this love a force that nothing
can resist. Which of us--and he question himself the side of the light,
from which our gaze is habitually averted--which of us but will find in
himself the recollection of certain strange workings of this force?
Which of us, when by the side of the most ordinary person perhaps, but
has suddenly become conscious of the advent of something that none had
summoned? Was it the soul, or perhaps life, that had turned within
itself like a sleeper on the point of awakening? I know not; nor did you
know, and no one spoke of it; but you did not separate from each other
as though nothing had happened.

To love thus is to love according to the soul; and there is no soul that
does not respond to this love. For the soul of man is a guest that has
gone hungry these centuries back, and never has it to be summoned twice
to the nuptial feast.

The souls of all our brethren are ever hovering about us, craving for a
caress, and only waiting for the signal. But how many beings there are
who all their life long have not dared make such a signal!

It is the disaster of our entire existence that we live thus away from
our soul, and stand in such dread of its slightest movement. Did we but
allow it to smile frankly in its silence and its radiance, we should be
already living an eternal life. We have only to think for an instant how
much it succeeds in accomplishing during those rare moments when we
knock off its chains--for it is our custom to enchain it as though it
were distraught--what it does in love, for instance, for there we do
permit it at times to approach the lattices of external life. And would
it not be in accordance with the primal truth if all men were to feel
that they were face to face with each other, even as the woman feels
with the man she loves?

This invisible and divine goodness, of which I only speak here because
of its being one of the surest and nearest signs of the unceasing
activity of our soul, this invisible and divine goodness ennobles, in
decisive fashion, all that it has unconsciously touched. Let him who has
a grievance against his fellow, descend into himself and seek out
whether he never has been good in the presence of that fellow.

For myself, I have never met any one by whose side I have felt my
invisible goodness bestir itself, without he has become, at that very
instant, better than myself. Be good at the depths of you, and you will
discover that those who surround you will be good even to the same
depths.

Nothing responds more infallibly to the secret cry of goodness than the
secret cry of goodness that is near.

While you are actively good in the invisible, all those who approach you
will unconsciously do things that they could not do by the side of any
other man.

Therein lies a force that has no name; a spiritual rivalry that knows no
resistance. It is as though this were the actual place where is the
sensitive spot of our soul; for there are souls that seem to have
forgotten their existence and to have renounced everything that enables
the being to rise; but, once touched here, they all draw themselves
erect; and in the divine plains of the secret goodness, the most humble
of souls cannot endure defeat.

And yet it is possible that nothing is changing in the life one sees;
but is it only that which matters, and is our existence indeed confined
to actions we can take in our hand like stones on the highroad? If you
ask yourself, as we are told we should ask every evening, "what of
immortal have I done to-day?" Is it always on the material side that we
can count, weigh and measure unerringly; is it there that you must begin
your search? It is possible for you to cause extraordinary tears to
flow; it is possible that you may fill a heart with unheard-of
certitudes, and give eternal life unto a soul, and no one shall know of
it, nor shall you even know yourself. It may be that nothing is
changing; it may be that were it put to the test all would crumble, and
that this goodness we speak of would yield to the smallest fear. It
matters not. Something divine has happened; and somewhere must our God
have smiled.

May it not be the supreme aim of life thus to bring to birth the
inexplicable within ourselves; and do we know how much we add to
ourselves when we awake something of the incomprehensible that slumbers
in every corner? Here you have awakened love which will not fall asleep
again. The soul that your soul has regarded, that has wept with you the
holy tears of the solemn joy that none may behold, will bear you no
resentment, not even in the midst of torture. It will not even feel the
need of forgiving. So convinced is it of one knows not what, that
nothing can henceforth dim or efface the smile that it wears within; for
nothing can ever separate two souls which, for an instant, "have been
good together."




SILENCE


As we advance through life, it is more and more brought home to us that
nothing takes place that is not in accord with some curious,
preconceived design: and of this we never breathe a word, we scarcely
dare to let our minds dwell upon it, but of its existence, somewhere
above our heads, we are absolutely convinced. The most fatuous of men
smiles, at the first encounters, as though he were the accomplice of the
destiny of his brethren. And in this domain, even those who can speak
the most profoundly realise--they, perhaps, more than others--that words
can never express the real, special relationship that exists between two
beings.

Were I to speak to you at this moment of the gravest things of all--of
love, death or destiny--it is not love, death or destiny that I should
touch; and, my efforts notwithstanding, there would always remain
between us a truth which had not been spoken, which we had not even
thought of speaking; and yet it is this truth only, voiceless though it
has been, which will have lived with us for an instant, and by which we
shall have been wholly absorbed. For that truth, was our truth as
regards death, destiny or love, and it was in silence only that we could
perceive it. And nothing save only the silence will have had any
importance. "My sisters," says a child in the fairy-story, "you have
each of you a secret thought--I wish to know it." We, too, have
something that people wish to know, but it is hidden far above the
secret thought--it is our secret silence.

But all questions are useless. When our spirit is alarmed, its own
agitation becomes a barrier to the second life that lives in this
secret; and, would we know what it is that lies hidden there, we must
cultivate silence among ourselves, for it is then only that for one
instant the eternal flowers unfold their petals, the mysterious flowers
whose form and colour are ever changing in harmony with the soul that is
by their side. As gold and silver are weighed in pure water, so does the
soul test its weight in silence, and the words that we let fall have no
meaning apart from the silence that wraps them round. If I tell someone
that I love him--as I may have told a hundred others--my words will
convey nothing to him; but the silence which will ensue, if I do indeed
love him, will make clear in what depths lie the roots of my love, and
will in its turn give birth to a conviction, that shall itself be
silent; and in the course of a lifetime, this silence and this
conviction will never again be the same....

Is it not silence that determines and fixes the savour of love? Deprived
of it, love would lose its eternal essence and perfume. Who has not
known those silent moments which separated the lips to reunite the
souls? It is these that we must ever seek. There is no silence more
docile than the silence of love, and it is indeed the only one that we
may claim for ourselves alone. The other great silences, those of death,
grief or destiny, do not belong to us. They come towards us at their
own hour, following in the track of events, and those whom they do not
meet need not reproach themselves. But we can all go forth to meet the
silence of love. They lie in wait for us, night and day, at our
threshold, and are no less beautiful than their brothers. And it is
thanks to them that those who have seldom wept may know the life of the
soul almost as intimately as those to whom much grief has come: and
therefore it is that such of us as have loved deeply have learnt many
secrets that are unknown to others: for thousands and thousands of
things quiver in silence on the lips of true friendship and love, that
are not to be found in the silence of other lips, to which friendship
and love are unknown....





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Inner Beauty, by Maurice Maeterlinck

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE INNER BEAUTY ***

***** This file should be named 34910.txt or 34910.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/9/1/34910/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Martin Pettit and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
