The Project Gutenberg EBook of The National Preacher, Vol. 2. No. 6., Nov.
1827, by William Patton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The National Preacher, Vol. 2. No. 6., Nov. 1827
       Or Original Monthly Sermons from Living Ministers

Author: William Patton

Editor: Rev. Austin Dickinson

Release Date: May 6, 2006 [EBook #18329]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NATIONAL PREACHER ***




Produced by Bryan Ness, Susan Skinner and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net








SERMON XXV.

FROM REV. MR. PATTON.

Vol. 2. No. 6. Nov. 1827.


THE

NATIONAL PREACHER:

OR

_ORIGINAL MONTHLY SERMONS_

FROM

LIVING MINISTERS.


EDITED BY
REV. AUSTIN DICKINSON,
_No. 144 Nassau-street,_
NEW-YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *

SPECIAL NOTICE.--Subscribers in cities, as well as in the country, are
expected to _send in_ their payments, agreeably to terms stated on the
next page, either to the Editor, or to some Agent named on the last
page. To candid men this notice need not be repeated.

       *       *       *       *       *

POSTAGE.

This Periodical contains but one sheet: the monthly Postage is, of
course,

_One Cent and a half_, not over 100 miles;
_Two Cents and a half_, any distance over 100.

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW-YORK:

PRINTED BY J. & J. HARPER, 82 CLIFF-STREET.

1827.

Persons receiving this gratis, are desired to give it circulation.




TERMS

OF THE

NATIONAL PREACHER.


I. Each Monthly Number to contain one long Sermon, or two of moderate
length, on superfine paper. The Volume to commence annually the last
week in June.

II. Price, One Dollar annually, _in advance, or on becoming a
Subscriber_, or One Dollar and Fifty cents, if payment is delayed after
the receipt of the sixth Number.

III. _Five_ or more persons forwarding their annual payments _at one
time, on becoming Subscribers, or immediately after the receipt of the
first Numbers of the Volume_, may receive the work for the year at
_eighty cents_ each. Or _twelve_ or more so doing, may receive it at
_seventy-five cents_ each: (viz. 6¼ cents a Number.)

IV. An Index and Title-page, referring to all the Numbers, will
accompany the twelfth.

SUBSCRIBERS' NAMES.    |    RESIDENCE.

NOTE. _Ten Cents_ each will be allowed for procuring and furnishing the
Editor _new_ Subscribers on any terms stated above. Essential service
might be rendered by copying the above terms in handsome form, and
employing a faithful person to go through the neighbourhood, with a
specimen of the work. The names of present subscribers may be
ascertained at the Post Office.

Copies furnished, by the dozen or hundred, at Tract prices, for
gratuitous distribution.

Such Subscribers as do not give the Editor notice to the contrary,
before the first of June, will be considered as Subscribers for the
ensuing year. Any one can discontinue on paying up arrearages.

Correspondents will be careful in naming the individuals to whom credit
is to be given, and the Post-Office and State to which the Work is to be
sent.

_Letters may be directed, POST PAID, to_

AUSTIN DICKINSON,
144 _Nassau-street, New-York_

All Subscribers will be furnished with the former Numbers of this
Volume:--and with the first Volume, if desired.




THE

NATIONAL PREACHER.

Go ... Teach all Nations.... _Matt._ xxviii. 19.

       *       *       *       *       *

VOL: II. NEW-YORK, NOVEMBER, 1827. NO. 6.

       *       *       *       *       *





SERMON XXV.

BY WILLIAM PATTON, A.M.

NEW-YORK.

THE DUTY AND IMPORTANCE OF SPECIAL EFFORTS FOR THE CONVERSION OF CITIES.

    LUKE xxiv. 47.--_And that repentance and remission of
    sins should be preached in his name among all nations_,
    BEGINNING AT JERUSALEM.


Here the apostles receive from Christ a commission to commence in one of
the chief cities of the world the great business of preaching the gospel
to mankind. The fulfilment of prophecy required them to begin at
Jerusalem. "Out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord
from Jerusalem." "And it shall be in that day, that living waters shall
go out from Jerusalem." But there were other and more special reasons.
It was at Jerusalem that the death and resurrection of the Son of God
took place:--facts, on which Christianity rested all its claims: and it
was fit that the enemies of truth should have every possible advantage
for controverting those facts. In commencing at Jerusalem, an immediate
and striking illustration was also afforded of the forgiving spirit of
Christianity--'Go at once, and preach unto these mine enemies repentance
and remission of sins. Let them have the opportunity of salvation
through my blood--even that blood which their own wicked hands have
shed.'

This direction to the first preachers of the cross, to begin at
Jerusalem, suggests the general thought,

THAT IT BECOMES CHRISTIANS, IN ALL AGES, TO MAKE SPECIAL EFFORTS FOR THE
CONVERSION OF CITIES AND LARGE TOWNS.

This thought may be illustrated and enforced, from the example and
instructions of Christ and his apostles; from the early and signal
visitations of the Spirit on cities; from the power with which Satan
reigns in them; and from their relative importance, and influence on the
world.


I. _Our Saviour devoted his personal ministry very much to cities and
large towns._

Says Matthew, "And it came to pass, when Jesus had made an end of
commanding his twelve disciples, he departed thence to teach and to
preach in their cities." Mark speaks of Him as follows: "And in the
morning, rising up a great while before day, he departed into a solitary
place, and there prayed: and Simon, and they that were with him,
followed after him. And when they had found him, they said unto him, All
men seek for thee. And he said unto them, Let us go into the next towns,
that I may preach there also: for therefore came I forth." Luke informs
us, that, on another occasion, He said unto those who sought him, and
who urged him that he should not depart from them, "I must preach the
kingdom of God to other cities also, for therefore am I sent."

From many other passages of Scripture, also, we learn of Christ's
preaching in cities. "And behold, the whole city came out to meet
Jesus." "And all the city was moved, saying, Who is this?" "And many of
the Samaritans of that city believed on him." He is also found in
Jericho, and in Capernaum. His wonders are made known at Chorazin and
Bethsaida. His walks are along the shores, where commerce and trade had
congregated vast multitudes. Jerusalem he repeatedly visits--especially
on the anniversaries of religious festivals; when his instructions might
fall upon the ear of assembled thousands; and through them be conveyed
to every town and village of the land. On one occasion, when he was come
near to the city, "he beheld and wept over it, saying, if thou hadst
known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong to
thy peace; but now are they hid from thine eyes.--Oh Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them that are
sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together,
even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!"
On another occasion, it is said, "Then began he to upbraid the cities,
wherein most of his mighty works were done, because they repented not.
Wo unto thee, Chorazin; wo unto thee, Bethsaida; for if the mighty works
which were done in you, had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have
repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. And thou Capernaum, which art
exalted unto heaven, shalt be brought down to hell; for if the mighty
works which have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would
have remained until this day. But I say unto you, that it shall be more
tolerable for the land of Sodom, in the day of judgment, than for thee."
Thus it appears that the All-wise Saviour thought it proper to devote
much of his ministry to cities and large towns.


II. _Christ, in his instructions to his disciples, particularly directs
their attention to cities and large towns._

"These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them, saying, Into
whatsoever city or town ye shall enter, inquire who in it is worthy; and
there abide till ye go thence. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor
hear your words, when ye depart out of that house or city, shake off the
dust of your feet. Verily, I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable
for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah, in the day of judgment, than for
that city." How solemn, yet well defined were these instructions. How
strongly must the twelve have been impressed with the importance of
special exertion in large towns and cities. "After these things, the
Lord appointed seventy also, and sent them two and two before his face,
into every city and place, whither he himself would come. And he said
unto them, Into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you, eat such
things as are set before you, and heal the sick that are therein, and
say unto them, the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. But into
whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you not, go your ways out
into the streets of the same, and say, even the very dust of your city,
which cleaveth on us, we do wipe off against you. But I say unto you, it
shall be more tolerable in that day for Sodom and Gomorrah, than for
that city." Wherefore should so much stress be laid upon cities, unless
it was peculiarly important that they should be converted? And wherefore
so heavy a curse, unless the power of their example was great?

But still more particular and urgent are his instructions--The
disciples, when sent forth, were admonished that they would be "as sheep
in the midst of wolves;"--that they would be exposed to many and severe
trials. And surely, under such circumstances, human nature would plead,
that, when persecuted in the city, they might turn to the less
prejudiced inhabitants of the country. But no: the command is, "When
they persecute you in one city, flee ye into another; for, verily, I say
unto you, ye shall not have gone over the cities of Israel, till the Son
of Man be come."

It is true, that in the last great commission, in which the world was
spread before them as the field, every limitation was taken off, save
that they should begin at Jerusalem. Still the example of the apostles
is worthy of notice. For whilst several of them continued for years in
Jerusalem,--notwithstanding the persecutions which they
experienced--others went forth, and immediately preached the gospel of
their ascended Saviour in other great cities of the world.

Paul and Barnabas are found at Antioch, the capital of Pisidia. From
Antioch they went to Iconium, the metropolis of Lyconia. Thence to
Derbe, another city of Lyconia. In that embassy, they also preached at
Lystra, and Perga, and many other cities. Soon after this, Paul said
unto Barnabas, "Let us go again, and visit our brethren in every city
where we have preached the word of the Lord, and see how they do." Paul
expressed an ardent desire to be at Jerusalem on the feast-days:--"For
he hasted, if it were possible for him, to be at Jerusalem, the day of
Pentecost;" for then thousands of strangers would be there
assembled--"Parthians, Medes, and Elamites, and the dwellers of
Mesopotamia," and of many other places. In Rome, too, that imperial
city, did this apostle continue for two years, preaching the gospel of
Christ. There he established a Christian church, to which he addressed
the noblest epistle ever written. Of Philip it is recorded, that
"passing through, he preached in all the cities, till he came to
Cesarea." The apostles and disciples, then directed their attention very
particularly to cities.


III. _Cities were the theatres of the Holy Spirit's first and most
illustrious achievements._

Open the book of the Acts, and mark how and where the Spirit of God
accompanied the labours of the apostles. It was at Jerusalem, the city
whose million voices had just before demanded the death of their Lord,
and imprecated his blood upon their own heads, that the first and
greatest effusion of the Holy Spirit took place. _There_ was spiritual
wickedness in high places. There iniquity was strongly intrenched. The
strong arm of the civil as well as ecclesiastical power was its defence;
and human calculation could look for no visits of mercy. Still the
Savior's command, to begin at Jerusalem, was obeyed. Nor was it long
before that city was filled with the presence of the Most High--before
the Spirit came down in power, and thousands were converted to Christ.

But this is not a solitary case. At Antioch, also, the Spirit was poured
out. Indeed, there are two places of this name mentioned in the Acts of
the Apostles;--both visited in saving mercy. One, the capital of Syria,
a city of great note. It was about ten miles in circumference; and, in
population, wealth, and splendour, esteemed the third city of the age.
Here Paul and Barnabas preached. Here the disciples were first called
Christians. Here the Church continued long to flourish. Here the
eloquent Chrysostom, at the close of the fourth century, preached with
great power and success: and here the Holy Spirit descended. "Now they,
which were scattered abroad, upon the persecution that arose about
Stephen, travelled as far as Phenice, and Cyprus, and Antioch, preaching
the word to none but the Jews only. And some of them were men of Cyprus
and Cyrene, which, when they were come to Antioch, spake unto the
Grecians, preaching the Lord Jesus. And the hand of the Lord was with
them: and a great number believed and turned unto the Lord. Then tidings
of these things came unto the ears of the Church which was in Jerusalem;
and they sent forth Barnabas, that he should go as far as Antioch. Who,
when he came and had seen the grace of God, was glad, and exhorted them
all, that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord." So
great was this work, so important this field of usefulness, that to
secure the best assistance, "Barnabas departed to Tarsus to seek Saul;
and when he had found him, he brought him unto Antioch. And it came to
pass, that a whole year they assembled themselves with the church, and
taught much people." So powerful was this work of God, as to demand, for
a whole year, the special labours of two of his most favoured servants.

The other Antioch, mentioned in the Acts, was the capital of Pisidia; a
place where many things opposed the advance of holiness. But there also
Paul and Barnabas laboured; and there souls were born into the kingdom.
The record is, "They came to Antioch, in Pisidia, and went into the
synagogue on the Sabbath day." And Paul preached of Jesus and the
resurrection, and faithfully warned against lightly esteeming the work
of God. "Beware, therefore, lest that come upon you, which is spoken in
the prophets: Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and perish; for I work a
work in your days, which ye shall in nowise believe though a man declare
it unto you. And when the Jews were gone out of the synagogue, the
Gentiles besought that these words might be preached unto them the next
Sabbath. And the next Sabbath day came almost the whole city together,
to hear the word of God. And when the Gentiles heard this, they were
glad, and glorified the word of the Lord; and as many as were ordained
to eternal life believed. And the word of the Lord was published
throughout all the region, and the disciples were filled with joy and
with the Holy Ghost."

Ephesus, too, was visited by the Holy Spirit. This was one of the most
famous cities of Asia Minor. By historians, it has been called the
ornament of Asia--the greatest and most frequented emporium of the
continent. Here stood one of the seven wonders of the world--the
idolatrous temple of Diana. Paul paid two visits to this city: the
first, a very short one. After some months, he returned, and continued
for three years, and had great success. Many things opposed the
influence of truth. Iniquity was deeply rooted: their established
religion was a source of revenue; and countenanced them in unhallowed
courses. But the Spirit of grace prevailed. The result was, "that many
that believed, came, and confessed, and showed their deeds. Many of
them, also, which used curious arts, brought their books together, and
burned them before all men. And they counted the price of them, and
found it fifty thousand pieces of silver;" or, according to our
currency, nearly twenty-eight thousand dollars. Thus multitudes made a
public renunciation of idolatry, and a public profession of their faith
in Christ. "So mightily grew the word of God, and prevailed."

The last city that we shall mention, as blessed with a revival, is
Corinth, the capital of Achaia. Here stood the temple of Venus; for the
support of whose costly and debasing services, a thousand human victims
were continually kept!--The multitude in this city were given to a
species of crime, most deadening to the conscience, and damning to the
soul. Yet all this did not discourage the intrepid apostle. For, about
the year of our Lord fifty-two, he came to Corinth, and "reasoned in the
synagogue every Sabbath day, and persuaded the Jews and the Greeks." The
persecuting spirit of the Jews was marshalled against him. Yet he was
successful, for _God was with him_. "Crispus, the chief ruler of the
synagogue, believed on the Lord with all his house; and many of the
Corinthians, hearing, believed and were baptized. Then spake the Lord to
Paul in the night by a vision, Be not afraid, but speak, and hold not
thy peace, for I am with thee, and no man shall set on thee to hurt
thee; for I have much people in this city." And so great was the work,
and so important the station, that "he continued there a year and six
months, teaching the word of God among them." Here a large church was
gathered, to which he addressed two epistles.

We could mention other ancient cities as blessed with revivals. We could
tell you of Athens, the eye and glory of Greece; of Philippi, the chief
city of Macedonia; of Iconium, "where a great multitude, both of the
Jews and also of the Greeks, believed;" of Rome too, and many others;
but we forbear, since enough is already before you to illustrate the
position, that cities were the theatres of the Holy Spirit's first and
most illustrious achievements. Indeed, what is the book of the Acts, but
one continued history of revivals in cities and populous places?


IV. _We should seek the conversion of Cities, because in them the
Adversary reigns with peculiar power._

Experienced Generals bend their most powerful forces against those
positions most strongly intrenched; well knowing, that if these are
subdued, the courage of the enemy is daunted, his plans marred, and that
what remains may fall an easy conquest. Why then should Christians leave
to Satan the quiet dominion of cities? He would rather give up a
thousand inland posts, than these strong holds of his empire. But, Oh,
could he be dislodged from these, how paralyzed would be his arm--how
feeble his resistance--how lost his influence! Would you see the power
of Satan in cities? Cast your eye back upon the past. What were Sodom
and Gomorrah? What were Tyre, and Sidon, and Ninevah? What was Babylon?
What was Jerusalem in its latter days, when given up accursed of God?
What were they, but sinks of pollution and fountains of ruin? And could
we draw aside the curtains of darkness, what might we see in modern
cities! Oh, the pollution, and dark waters, that are open to the eye of
God! Oh, the thousand lures to vice! Oh, the frauds, the oppressions,
the numberless wrongs, which break down the integrity of the young;
which harden the middle-aged, and cover gray hairs with shame, and
wretchedness, and ruin! Oh, the dissipations, over which custom has
thrown an influence well nigh omnipotent! Oh, the tauntings, and the
high looks, the stiff neck, and the contemptuous sneer, with which
wealth and station conduct themselves towards the lowliness of Christian
meekness! Oh, the power that nerves itself against holiness! Wealth and
imposing splendour, eloquence and numbers, are in its ranks. Perjury and
cruel mockings are among its weapons. Oh, the chains of darkness and
gates of death, with which the strong man armed here holds his
prisoners! How loudly then do these demand the commiseration and special
effort of those, who would proclaim liberty to the captives, and life to
the dead! And for the encouragement of the faithful, we add,


V. _There are peculiar advantages for the promotion of Religion in
cities._

God is wont to accompany the efforts of his people with special grace,
whenever they are exposed to extraordinary hazards. So, where peculiar
difficulties obstruct the advance of truth, there will also be found
other circumstances, which, if properly seized, will greatly facilitate
the work of reformation.

In cities, ministers and good men can readily and effectually co-operate
in plans of usefulness. The inhabitants of smaller towns and villages
are too scattered to allow of ready co-operation; but in our cities, a
few minutes may assemble many of those who love the Lord. The dangers
which threaten, or the hopes which gladden, quickly circulate. The
weakness of one portion may be readily sustained by the greater strength
of some other portion. In the multitude of professing Christians, may be
found men of wisdom, of wealth, of enterprise, of leisure, of
devotedness; all of whose varied gifts and talents may be concentrated
for good. Surely these are advantages peculiar to cities. Too long have
we looked upon the might of opposing interests, and neglected the power
which God hath given us. Too long have churches stood alone, and feebly
exerted their separate influences. But in a union of the efforts of
churches the increase of power may be immense; for whilst "one shall
chase a thousand, two shall put ten thousand to flight."

It is by the means which cities afford for ready co-operation, that
Satan and his followers have in all ages achieved so much. _They_ make
common cause. They suffer no differences to divide their strength;
knowing "that an house divided against itself cannot stand." They
combine their forces, in any plan which promises injury to the Christian
interest. Cities furnish to Christians the very same opportunities for
united effort, and thus present peculiar advantages.

Again, cities also furnish advantages for individual exertion. Here a
minister's influence may at once reach, not merely to his own
congregation, but far beyond. Every month he is brought in contact with
some thousands, who may be affected by his faithfulness. And under his
influence, many benevolent and pious institutions may rise and shine to
bless the world.

But it is not to ministers alone, that cities present large fields for
exertion. Private Christians also have abundant opportunities for
usefulness. In the walks of business, the influence of one inflexibly
just man is felt as far as his name is known. If Christians, in our
cities, would conduct themselves agreeably to the Bible, how awful to
the wicked would be their example! What reformations would be wrought
among the worldly and profane! How many haunts of poverty and
wretchedness would be searched out! How many souls, once in communion
with the saints, would be brought back from their wanderings! How many
children, rescued from vice, would be brought to the Sabbath school; and
there, perhaps, be taught of God to become themselves angels of mercy!
How many meetings for prayer and exhortation would every week be
sustained among the poor and the wretched! How many of these degraded
immortals might be rescued from temporal and eternal darkness, to become
lights in the world, and stars in the kingdom of our Father's glory!
What field then offers so rich and large an harvest to faithful labour?
The same exertion, that would instruct hundreds in the country, may
reach thousands in the city. Public sentiment has too long checked the
movements of sympathy for these congregated thousands. A voice, almost
unbroken, has sounded out; 'Peculiar and insuperable difficulties
prevent a general revival in cities: such are the occupations, such the
habits, such the temptations, and such the superabounding iniquity, that
it were visionary to hope for any general and powerful work of mercy.'
Well, then, had we not better give all up; and let human nature here
sink into its natural channels; and let multitudes before our eyes
continue to crowd the gates of the second death! O God, forbid such
cowardice, cruelty, and treachery in thy servants! No; we will not thus
surrender immortals. While there is grace or even nature in our hearts,
we will not. We have, indeed, heard of difficulties, till the heart is
pained, and the soul is wearied. But where are these insuperable
difficulties to be found? Not in the Scriptures of God, surely; not in
the result of apostolic labours; but in the unbelief and inaction of
modern Christians. "God is no more hostile to cities than to villages:
his Spirit is as free, and his offers of salvation as full, to the
people of the crowded city, as of the open country." Let the advantages
then be embraced. Let the power be concentrated. Let the sacramental
host arise; and the work is done. And instead of being overwhelmed with
shame and deserved reproach, we may joyfully say to such as pass by;
"Walk about Zion, and go round about her: tell the towers thereof; mark
ye well her bulwarks, consider her palaces; that ye may tell it to the
generation following. For this God is our God for ever and ever." "Then
the sons also of them that afflicted Zion shall come bending unto her;
and all they that despised her shall bow themselves down at the soles of
her feet; and they shall call her the City of the Lord--the Zion of the
Holy One of Israel."


VI. _A sixth reason for special efforts in behalf of Cities is, the
influence which they exert on the country and on the world._

Look to any nation, whether ancient or modern; throw the map before you;
fix your eye upon the spots that bear rule; that command the attention
of the enterprising, and busy the thoughts of statesmen. You have fixed
it upon the cities of the world. Where was the strength of Italy, if not
in Rome, once mistress of the world? Where the strength of Greece, if
not in Athens, the mother of arts and refinement? And where is the
strength of our Republic, if not in our cities and large towns? There
talent in every art and profession is fostered, and exerts peculiar
influence. There wealth concentrates its millions upon millions, to
exert extensively a blasting or brightening influence on society. There
the press daily sends out its thousands and its tens of thousands of
winged messengers, to excite the passions, to influence the opinions, to
control the energies of a nation. Powerful as is this engine, for
corrupting or sanctifying the people, who does not know that its
munitions and magazines of strength are placed principally in cities;
and that the character which the press there sustains is diffused
throughout the land? In cities, commerce is concentrated. The products
of the soil flow from every county, town, and village, to the cities;
and thence they are distributed to the world. The riches, the luxuries,
the products of other climes and nations are brought to cities, and
thence distributed through the land. How manifest then, that cities must
exert a mighty influence on the country and on the world. Who, that
reflects on their extended intercourse, does not know, that they
regulate the prices of commodities; that their fashions are imitated;
that their maxims of trade are common law; and that their moral habits
and opinions, good or bad, have an influence on the whole community?
Their influence is great, whether we consider them in a moral or
political point of view. The capture of a city has decided the destiny
of nation. When Babylon was taken, a mighty empire was given to the
invader. When Jerusalem was vanquished, all Judea was subdued. When
ill-fated France was tossed with revolutions and counter-revolutions,
the possession of her metropolis gave to either party the supreme
command.

Now suppose that all this influence of cities is of a worldly, immoral,
irreligious character; what must be its blasting power on the general
interests of religion! It was when the pretended successor of Peter
established his authority in Rome, that that mystical Babylon became
"the mother of harlots," and "made the nations drunk with the wine of
the wrath of her fornications." And not until the angel shall "cry, with
a mighty and strong voice, _Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen_,"
will the strong man armed be vanquished, and the earth be encompassed
with glory. Not until the evil influence of cities shall be arrested,
will the mighty obstacles to the world's redemption be removed. How
immeasurably important then, that great efforts be made for their
conversion; and how merciful in God to destroy such of them as will not
repent. Oh, it was mercy infinite, that rained down fire upon Sodom,
and poured it heavily upon Gomorrah; and thus saved millions from the
contagion of their wickedness!

But suppose that all the influence of cities were of an heavenly
character--suppose the intelligence could be circulated along all our
navigable rivers and canals--suppose it could be communicated from
village to village, and from family to family, throughout the country,
that the Spirit of God, as on the day of Pentecost, had come down in
awful majesty and power among us; that all our men of business, and
youth of folly, had been arrested in their worldly career; that all our
theatres and resorts for vain pleasure had been forsaken; that our
temples were crowded and overflowing with devout worshippers, and
anxious inquirers; that the universal voice of our city's population had
become, What shall we do, that we may glorify God and extend his
kingdom? Suppose, I say, that this mighty change in our city could be
told throughout the country; who can estimate the overwhelming influence
it would carry along with it? Where is the solitary village that would
not feel the impulse, and have its eye and heart lifted to Heaven, in
view of the bright cloud of incense, ascending from these hundred
temples, and these thrice ten thousand family altars? And to extend our
view still further; suppose that every city of our land--that every city
of the world--should experience such a change; what almighty strength
and zeal would it give to the Angel having the everlasting Gospel to
publish! How soon would the universal acclamation of mankind be, "Glory,
and honour, and power be unto Him that sitteth upon the throne!" And how
soon would that blessed voice be heard from the heaven of heavens, "The
kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of the Lord, and his
Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever!"

These are not mere pictures of the imagination. The realities are at
hand. And the influence of cities, in introducing them, must be felt.
For "they of the city shall flourish like the grass of the earth." "The
name of the city from that day shall be, _The Lord is there_." "Thus
saith the Lord of hosts, it shall yet come to pass, that there shall
come people, and the inhabitants of many cities; and the inhabitants of
one city shall go to another, saying, let us go speedily to pray before
the Lord, and to seek the Lord of hosts." Thus the day shall yet be,
when the presence and power of the Holy God in cities shall so absorb
the affections, and command the energies of their inhabitants, that,
throughout the land, they shall be known and celebrated, not for their
wealth, their splendour, their numbers, or their worldly enterprise, but
_as the places where God has fixed his tabernacle_. Yes, the day shall
yet come when the intercourse between cities shall be chiefly for
purposes of religious improvement--when combinations for political
intrigue, or mercantile speculation, which now waken such intensity of
interest in our cities, shall dwindle to their comparative nothingness;
and when the world's redemption shall assume its proper magnitude; and
all be stimulated to more holy devotedness, and more heavenly effort.
Oh, what a day, when all our increasing facilities of intercourse with
the land, and with foreign nations, shall be used mainly for advancing
that kingdom which consists in righteousness and peace!--when thousands
shall prayerfully wait the arrival of every post, and hail the coming in
of every vessel, for intelligence, not of this world's riches and
glories, but of the glories and victories of Zion.

Such, however, is the present power of the adversary in cities, that no
ordinary effort will dispossess him. Still it must be done. The triumph
of the cross, the salvation of the world can never be perfected without
it. I know there are difficulties;--that cities do congregate vast
assemblies of active depravity;--that they present multiplied
enchantments to ruin;--that in every city wickedness displays a stern
and lofty front. But I also know, that before the coming Spirit of God
these obstacles shall melt away like wax, and vanish like smoke; "for
strong is his hand and high is his right hand."

It was when revivals prevailed in cities, that the gospel spread with
such amazing rapidity: and so, when the Spirit shall again descend upon
them, will the work of reformation move forward with such power and
grandeur, as shall make manifest that God is in Zion; "that the chariots
of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of angels;" and that "the
Lord is among them, as in Sinai, in the holy place." Let all, then, who
love Zion, seek for the reviving influences of the Spirit upon cities.
While every hand is faithful in the discharge of duty, let every heart
be impressed with the sentiment, _Not by might, nor by power, but by my_
SPIRIT, _saith the Lord of hosts_; and let every eye be directed to Him
who hath promised, that _when iniquity cometh in like a flood, the
Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard_.

In urging the importance of special effort and prayer for the renovation
of cities, we do not overlook the interests of the country; but would
thus guard every town and village from an influence heavily impregnated
with moral poison and death. The merchants of the interior, in the
prosecution of their business, regularly visit the metropolis. Many of
them, on the enticement of friends and acquaintance, attend the
theatres, and other places of vain amusement and sin; they become
familiar with their glare and dissipation. They return, and tell what
their eyes have seen, and what their ears have heard, and thus create in
the bosom of the young, the ardent, the rich, and the worldly, a thirst
for similar pastimes, and a disrelish for sober realities. Many faithful
pastors in the land weep over the growing immoralities occasioned by the
influence of cities. Many churches lament the defection of their
members, having become worldly in their spirit, and vain in their
imaginations, by reason of their frequent intercourse with cities. If
such, then, is their influence upon the country, well may the churches,
planted throughout the land, feel deeply interested in the moral
character of cities, and pray for their conversion to God.

Let our cities become places of holiness: let holiness to the Lord be
written upon the heart of every merchant, of every mechanic, of every
statesman, of every counsellor, of every officer, upon every hall of
legislation, and every splendid edifice; and an influence sweet, holy,
and happy, shall go forth to revive the hearts of God's people, to awe
and confound opposers, and to dress up the wilderness "like the garden
of God."

O, what a scene of grandeur and glory, when the thousands of the saints
shall wrestle in the spirit of Jacob for the blessing: when they shall
rise up in the spirit of their Master, and display an untiring zeal for
the salvation of man! O, what a scene, when the immense crowds of
immortal beings, who throng our streets, shall be deeply impressed with
the conviction of their accountability!--When every man shall feel that
he is acting continually under the eye of God, and in full prospect of
the judgment. Let these scenes be realized, and already I see "the holy
city, the new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as
a bride adorned for her husband." And I hear "a great voice out of
heaven, saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will
dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be
with them, and be their God."

Friends of the Redeemer, the hastening of this blessed consummation
depends very much upon your will. God has intrusted great power in your
hands. In the revelation of his Son, he has given you that word, which
is "as a fire, and like a hammer, that breaketh the rock in pieces." In
shedding down a spirit of union, and guiding to the formation of great
benevolent associations, he has given you facilities for extended
influence hitherto unparalleled. He has given you wealth, and knowledge,
and all the means for using these facilities. And in the article of
prayer, he has endued you with a power well nigh omnipotent. His
condescending language is, "Concerning the work of my hands COMMAND YE
ME." I see among you men of wealth, who can count your tens, your
fifties, and your hundreds of thousands,--all of which has been solemnly
consecrated to God. I see among you men of talent,--"capable of
intimidating the collective vices of a nation or an age." I see among
you men of enterprise, and courage, and resistless perseverance. I see
among you men, who have strong confidence in God. And shall these varied
powers of resistance and aggression be circumscribed by the walls of
individual churches? Shall they not rather be combined for raising a
higher and higher tone of moral feeling, and Christian enterprise? Shall
they not send a strong, concentrated light into every dark retreat of
wickedness? Shall not the tide of dissipation, and crime, that would
overflow and mar every thing sacred, be met and turned back? Shall not
thousands and tens of thousands on our borders, and in our midst, be
rescued from the iron sway of the destroyer, and be saved from going
down to the pit? Shall not new temples be opened for their reception?
and shall not "God, even our God, be a wall of fire round about them,
and a glory in the midst of them?"

Do you ask more particularly, how this shall be done? Plant, for
instance, an able and devoted minister in the most degraded portion of
our city. Let him employ his time in the cultivation of one thousand of
these minds. Let him, by the aid of self-denying brethren, assemble them
in one place on the holy sabbath. Let him visit their houses, and pray
with them, every month. Let him collect the children and youth into
sabbath schools and bible classes. Let him encourage among them every
means of intellectual as well as spiritual elevation; and how
astonishing will be the change wrought, even in the course of one year.
Instead of being objects of pity, shame, and aversion; many of them
become pillars of light, and exert a purifying influence upon others. Is
not this elevation worth more than all the necessary expense, even
leaving out of the account all the eternal results? Let, then, another
and another degraded portion be selected, and in like manner be
regenerated and ennobled. Especially let no one who feeds at the table
of our common Lord, and lives from week to week on the provisions of his
house, refuse, promptly and vigorously to co-operate in the work of
mercy, while a soul is perishing in ignorance and sin!

In the mean time, let our civil fathers look well to the execution of
laws, which themselves have made, for the suppression of
sabbath-breaking and immorality. And let them inquire seriously, Whether
all our children and youth may not be brought under the influence of
instructors of good character, and other moral restraints, a
thousand-fold more efficacious, for preventing crime, than statutes, and
prisons, and chains.

Our hearts rejoice to see new blocks of buildings going up to decorate
our city. But what is that to the present and eternal elevation of
these thousand minds? Should we not then exult in the privilege of
lifting all the degraded portions of our city, and of our land, into
intellectual and moral grandeur? What object of ambition could there be,
equal to that of thus creating an empire of righteousness--a world of
intellect? Such monuments of glory shall remain, when earthly
governments shall be no more, and the earth itself shall have passed
away.

Never, methinks, was the language of God more distinct, than at the
present crisis. To the rich he is manifestly saying, "Bring ye all the
tithes into the store-house, that there may be meat in my house, and
prove me now herewith, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and
pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive
it. And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes; and all nations shall
call you blessed." To the ministers of religion, and to all his chosen,
he is manifestly saying, "O Zion, that bringest good tidings, get thee
up into the high mountain: O Jerusalem, that bringest good tidings, lift
up thy voice with strength; lift it up; be not afraid; say unto the
cities; Behold your God! Behold the Lord God will come with strong hand,
and his arm shall rule for him: behold, his reward is with him, and his
work before him." "When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in
his glory. He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise
their prayer. This shall be written for the generation to come: and the
people which shall be created, shall praise the Lord. For he hath looked
down from the height of his sanctuary, to hear the groaning of the
prisoner; to loose those that are appointed to death; to declare the
name of the Lord in Zion, and his praise in Jerusalem."

These are great privileges for God to confer on such worms as we are.
Yet God has indeed placed them within reach. And if we will but do our
duty here, we are only ripening for infinitely greater privileges and
higher honours. He that is _faithful over a few things_, shall be made
_ruler over many things_. Yes; when all our cities, and the earth
itself, and these heavens shall be "wrapt in consuming fire," we may,
"with the great multitude found faithful," enter that _City, which hath
foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God_. In _that_ City, "THERE
SHALL BE NO MORE CURSE, BUT THE THRONE OF GOD AND THE LAMB SHALL BE IN
IT, AND HIS SERVANTS SHALL SERVE HIM. AND THERE SHALL BE NO NIGHT THERE;
AND THEY NEED NO CANDLE, NEITHER LIGHT OF THE SUN; FOR THE LORD GOD
GIVETH THEM LIGHT: AND THEY SHALL REIGN FOR EVER AND EVER."




APPENDIX.


The population of New-York city, in 1820, was 123,706. In 1825, it was
166,086: making an increase, in 5 years, of 42,380. Allowing the same
ratio of increase, there is now a population of 185,000. There are in
the city 101 churches, or houses of public worship: Of which 4 are Roman
Catholic, 1 New-Jerusalem, 2 Unitarian, 2 Universalist, 2 Jews'
Synagogues, 15 Baptist, 13 Methodist, 17 Episcopalian, and 34
Presbyterian churches, including the Scotch and Reformed Dutch. The
remainder are Lutheran, Moravian, Friends, German Reformed, and
Independents. The average number of regular attendants is estimated, by
such as have made it a subject of special examination, not to exceed 400
to each house; which makes the number of those statedly attending public
worship 40,400. After deducting 50,000, for children, for the sick, and
for others necessarily absent, there will still remain NINETY-FOUR
THOUSAND AND SIX HUNDRED, or _more than half the population, absenting
themselves from the public worship of God!_

There are in the city 4 theatres and 2 circuses: most of which are
opened from 4 to 6 nights every week. The number of shops and other
places licensed to sell liquor by the small measure, is three thousand;
or about one to every SEVENTH DWELLING-HOUSE! In addition to the
violations of holy time, occasioned by steam-boats, and other public
conveyances, by butchers, grocers, and other traders purchasing their
stock from boats arriving from the country, upwards of ONE THOUSAND
_shops, and other places, are opened for the sale of liquor or other
things on the Sabbath_!

Nor is this view peculiar to New-York. A critical investigation of facts
in other cities will develop similar results. In London, the whole
number of churches and chapels of all denominations is estimated at 400.
"If we calculate," says a late English writer, "that the average
attendance is 500; which is certainly the greatest extent we can allow,
and add 250 more for the fluctuating hearers, it will give a result of
300,000 persons. The population of this metropolis is estimated at
1,274,800. From which subtract the feeble minority above, and we find
NINE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-FOUR THOUSAND EIGHT HUNDRED _persons neglecting
the public worship of God_! It appears that of the commercial papers
published in London on the Sunday, there are circulated, on the lowest
estimate, 45,000 copies; and that upon the most moderate computation,
between two and three hundred thousand readers of these papers are to be
found in the metropolis alone. While the great number of pressmen,
distributers, master-venders, hawkers, and subordinate agents, of both
sexes, and of all ages, who are employed on the Sabbath, all tend to the
most flagrant breach of the day of rest."

In the mean time, the number of deaths in New-York is about _five
thousand_ annually: in London, about _thirty-three thousand_.




CONTRIBUTORS.


The following Gentlemen, (of five different Denominations,) among
others, are expected to contribute Sermons for this Work:

_Rev. Drs. Mason_, _Milnor_, _Mathews_, _Spring_, and _Bangs_, and _Rev.
Mr. De Witt_, New-York City; _Rev. Dr. Richards_, Professor in the
Theological Seminary at Auburn; _Rev. Dr. Proudfit_, Salem; _Rev. Dr.
Chester_, Albany, and _Rev. Mr. Beman_, Troy; _Rev. Dr. M'Dowell_,
Elizabethtown, N.J.; _Rev. Dr. Miller_, Professor in Princeton
Theological Seminary; _Rev. Drs. Green_, _Staughton_, _Janeway_, and
_Skinner_, and _Rev. Mr. Bedell_, Philadelphia; _Rev. Professor
M'Clelland_, Dickinson College, Pa.; _Rev. Dr. Taylor_, Professor in
New-Haven Theological Seminary; _Rev. Mr. Fitch_, Professor of Divinity,
Yale College; _Rev. Mr. Hawes_, Hartford, and _Rev. Asahel Nettleton_,
Killingworth, Con.; _Rev. Dr. Wayland_, President of Brown University;
_Rt. Rev. Bp. Griswold_, Bristol, R.I.; _Rev. Dr. Griffin_, President of
Williams College; _Rev. Dr Humphrey_, President of Amherst College;
_Rev. Dr. Beecher_, Boston; _Rev. Professors _Porter_, _Woods_, and
_Stuart_, of Andover Theological Seminary; _Rev. Daniel A. Clark_,
Bennington, Vt.; _Rev. Dr. Bates_, President of Middlebury College;
_Rev. Dr. Matthews_, Shepherdstown, and _Rev. Dr. Rice_, Prince Edward,
Virg.; _Rev. Dr. Tyler_, President of Dartmouth College, N.H. _Rev. Dr.
Leland_, Charleston, S.C.

       *       *       *       *       *

Those to whom this work is forwarded gratuitously, are respectfully
requested to promote its circulation.




RECEIVING AGENTS.


The following Persons are authorized to receive and forward payments to
the Editor:


MAINE.

Portland, William Hyde.
Bowdoin College. A.C. Baldwin.
Waterville, H. Chase, P.M.
Bangor, Royal Clark, P.M.
Bristol, Aaron Blaney, P.M.
Vassalboro', Theodore S. Brown.
Lubec, Moses Fuller, P.M.
Bloomfield, Joseph Locke, P.M.
Whitefield, David Crowell, P.M.
Ellsworth, Joseph A. Wood, P.M.
West Jefferson, F. Shepherd, P.M.
South Berwick, Charles E. Norton.


NEW-HAMPSHIRE.

Hanover, George Wheeler, P.M.
Cornish, William Whittlesey, P.M.
Keene, T.M. Edwards, P.M.
Concord, John West.


VERMONT.

Middlebury, E. Brewster.
Rutland, Charles Walker.
St. Albans, Horace Janes, P.M.
Sharon, Chester Baxter, P.M.
Bennington, Stephen Hinsdale.
Brattleboro, Holbrook & Fessenden.
Burlington, C. Goodrich.
Springfield, Nomlas Cobb.


MASSACHUSETTS.

Boston, A. Russel, at Hanover Ch.
Salem, Whipple & Lawrence.
Newburyport, Charles Whipple.
Springfield, Solomon Warriner.
Northampton, Simeon Butler.
Amherst, Luke Sweetser.
Greenfield, A. Phelps.
Pittsfield, Joshua Danforth, P.M.
Williams College, Saml. Hutchings.
Plymouth, Ezra Collier.
Andover, Artemas Bullard.
Wrentham, Robert Blake.
Worcester, James Wilson, P.M.
Berkley, Asahel Hathaway, P.M.
Lowell, Jonathan C. Morrill, P.M.


CONNECTICUT.

New-Haven, Nathan Whiting.
Hartford, Peter B. Gleason.
Middletown, Edwin Hunt.
Brooklyn, Ambrose Edson.
Woodstock, George Bowen, P.M.
New London, E. Chesebrough.
Norwich, John Hyde, P.M.
Bozrahville, Alfred Holt.
Stonington, William W. Rodman.
Fairfield, Gershom Sturges.
Litchfield, S.S. Smith.


RHODE-ISLAND.

East Greenwich, John Brown.
Providence, Alexander Jones.


NEW-YORK.

Union College, John M'Dowall.
Albany, George J. Loomis.
Kinderhook, Henry L. Van Dyck.
Onondaga C.H. Hezekiah Strong.
Auburn Seminary, E.C. Beach.
Pen Yan, Ira Gould.
Utica, Charles Hastings.
Mount Pleasant, J. Dickerson.
East Ridge, William Stone.
Newburgh, Joseph Sibbet.
Rochester, Seth D. Chapin.
Moscow, Felix Tracy, P.M.
De Ruyter, Sylvester Aylsworth.
Geneva, J. Smith, Jr.
Springville, Rufus C. Eaton, P.M.
Catskill, Hezekiah Thayer.
Venice, Sherman Beardsley, P.M.
Youngstown, A.G. Hinman, P.M.
Troy, Edward Wilson, Jr.
Syracuse, Pliny Dickinson.
Sidney Plains, Samuel Rogers.
Fort Covington, Samuel L. Crosby.


NEW-JERSEY.

Princeton, J.B. Van Dyck.


PENNSYLVANIA.

Philadelphia, Anthony Finley.
  do.      Jared Bunce.
Carlisle, G. Duffield.
Huntingdon, I. Dorland, P.M.
Meadville, D. Andrews, P.M.
Pittsburgh, Robert Patterson.
Harrisburgh, William Graydon.
Braintrim, H.W. Northup.
Wilkesbarre, O. Collins.
Bethany, Jason Torrey.
Alexandria, John Porter, P.M.


DELAWARE.

Wilmington, Robert Porter.


MARYLAND.

Baltimore, John H. Naff.
Princess Anne, Joshua Moore.
Chestertown, Joseph Redue, P.M.
Vienna, Uriah Medford, P.M.


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.

Washington, Reuben Post.
Alexandria, Reuel Keith.


VIRGINIA.

Richmond, Nathaniel Charter.
Petersburg, James Dwight.
Norfolk, Shepard K. Kollock.
Weston, G.D. Camden, P.M.
Romney, John Jack, P.M.
Ebenezer Academy, H. Clary, P.M.
Cartersville, George W. Hundly.
Powhatan C.H. Thomas Scott, P.M.
Abingdon, Augustus Oury, P.M.
Gloucester C.H. W.D. Cairns.
Lynchburg, William Poe.
Boydton, James Brame.
Charlotte C.H. John Morton, P.M.
Liberty, James Mitchell, Jr.
Winchester, Samuel H. Davis.
Prince Edward C.H., Francis Bartlet.
Otter Bridge, J. Leftwich, P.M.


NORTH CAROLINA

Fayetteville, Robert H. Morrison.
Newbern, Thomas Watson, P.M.
Salisbury, Thomas L. Cowan
Mecklenburgh, S. Williamson, P.M.
Alfordsville, Warren Alford, P.M.
Wilmington, A.J. De Rosset.
Milton, James W. Douglass.
Lincolnton, David Reinhardt, P.M.
Raleigh, P.W. Dowd.


SOUTH CAROLINA.

Charleston, Horace Utley.
Camden, Thomas M'Millan.
Georgetown, Peter Cuttino.
Beaufort, David Turner, P.M.
Bradleyville, R. Witherspoon, P.M.
Edgefield, A.B. M'Whorter.
Conwayboro', Henry Durant, P.M.
Lexington, C.H. J. Meetze, P.M.
Sumpterville, Jesse Hartwell.


GEORGIA.

Savannah, J.C.A. Johnston.
Augusta, Timothy Edwards.
Riceboro', A.H. Sample.
Wrightsboro', Joseph Barnes, P.M.
Bethsaida, Oliver Morse, P.M.
Mount Zion, M.H. Carrington.
Powelton, J.H. Burnet, P.M.
Clarksville, Thomas J. Rusk, P.M.
Sunbury, F.R. Whitwell, P.M.
Athens, Leander A. Erwin, P.M.
Carmel, Isaac Proctor, P.M.
Bethlehem, John F. Wallis, P.M.
Fortville, Henry W. Jernegan.


OHIO.

Columbus, James Hoge.
Steubenville, Charles C. Beatty.
Cincinnati, David Root.
Ellsworth, L.W. Leffingwell, P.M.
Marietta, L.G. Bingham.
Burton, Luther Humphrey.
Cadiz, Thomas Phillips, P.M.
Miami, Charles Atherton, P.M.
Rome, Elijah Crosby, P.M.
Vernon, Harvey Coe.


INDIANA.

Portersville, Simon Morgan, P.M.
Salem, Burr Bradley, P.M.
Indianapolis, George Bush.
Barbersville, Timothy Barber, P.M.


ILLINOIS.

Belleville, James Mitchell, P.M.
Greenville, Ansel Birge, P.M.
Canton, Nathan Jones, P.M.
Vandalia, James Hall.


KENTUCKY.

Munfordville, J.T.S. Brown, P.M.
Princeton, H. Cassidy, P.M.
Danville, Benjamin Shaw.
Cynthiana, A. Broadwell, P.M.
Henderson, James Hillyer, P.M.
Shelbyville, A.A. Shannon.
Frankfort, S.M. Noel.
Hopkinsville, John Bryan, P.M.
Harrodsburg, Thomas Cleland.
Augusta, Samuel Bonde, P.M.
Columbia, John Montgomery, P.M.


TENNESSEE.

Knoxville, James Campbell.
Winchester, John Goodwin, P.M.
Nashville, R.P. Hayes.
Dresden, Samuel A. Warner.
Paperville, T.C. Buckhart, P.M.
Jonesboro', D.A. Deadrick, P.M.
Murfreesboro', D. Wendell, P.M.
Columbia, Francis W.S. Frierson.
Blountsville, Samuel Rhea, P.M.
Lebanon, A. Bradshaw.
Hillsboro, G.W. Richardson, P.M.
Farmington, S.W. Calvert.


ALABAMA.

Huntsville, William Leech.
Perry, C.H. G.W. Brame.
Russelville, Peter Martin, P.M.
Somerville, M.C. Houston, P.M.
Bainbridge, S.M. Parry, P.M.
Florence, John Craig, P.M.
Courtland, John White.
Shelby C.H. Thos. W. Smith. P.M.
Ashville, Archibald Sloan, P.M.


MISSOURI.

St. Louis, Salmon Giddings.
Fredericktown, Thos. Mosely, P.M.
Clay, C.H. Wm. S. Smith, P.M.


MISSISSIPPI.

Natchez, John Henderson.
Port Gibson, D. Greenleaf, P.M.
Woodville, G.A. Irion.
Gallatin, A.B. Ross, P.M.
Columbia, A.G. Moore.
Pinckneyville, James Wilson, P.M.


LOUISIANA.

Baton Rouge, H. Alexander, P.M.
New-Orleans, William Ross.


FLORIDA.

Pensacola, W. Hazell Hunt, P.M.


ARKANSAW.

Dwight, Alfred Finney.


CHOCTAW NATION.

David Folsom.


MICHIGAN.

Detroit, D.G. Jones.


CANADA.

Montreal, William Hedge.
Kingston, Rev. Mr. Foote.


SOUTH AMERICA.

Buenos Ayres, Theop. Parvin.

       *       *       *       *       *

Post-Masters are hereby authorized to receive and forward payments to
the Editor, as well as names of Subscribers.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The National Preacher, Vol. 2. No. 6.,
Nov. 1827, by William Patton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NATIONAL PREACHER ***

***** This file should be named 18329-8.txt or 18329-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/3/2/18329/

Produced by Bryan Ness, Susan Skinner and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
