The Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, 1664, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, 1664
       Transcribed From The Shorthand Manuscript In The Pepysian
       Library Magdalene College Cambridge By The Rev. Mynors
       Bright

Author: Samuel Pepys

Commentator: Lord Braybrooke

Editor: Henry B. Wheatley

Release Date: October 12, 2006 [EBook #4153]
Posting Date: March 22, 2009

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, 1664 ***




Produced by David Widger







THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

(Unabridged)

WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

1964

By Samuel Pepys

Edited With Additions By

Henry B. Wheatley F.S.A.




    LONDON
    GEORGE BELL & SONS YORK ST.  COVENT GARDEN
    CAMBRIDGE DEIGHTON BELL & CO.


    1893




JANUARY 1663-1664

January 1st, Went to bed between 4 and 5 in the morning with my mind
in good temper of satisfaction and slept till about 8, that many people
came to speak with me. Among others one came with the best New Year's
gift that ever I had, namely from Mr. Deering, with a bill of exchange
drawn upon himself for the payment of L50 to Mr. Luellin. It being for
my use with a letter of compliment. I am not resolved what or how to do
in this business, but I conclude it is an extraordinary good new year's
gift, though I do not take the whole, or if I do then give some of it to
Luellin. By and by comes Captain Allen and his son Jowles and his wife,
who continues pretty still. They would have had me set my hand to a
certificate for his loyalty, and I know not what his ability for any
employment. But I did not think it fit, but did give them a pleasing
denial, and after sitting with me an hour they went away. Several others
came to me about business, and then being to dine at my uncle Wight's
I went to the Coffee-house, sending my wife by Will, and there staid
talking an hour with Coll. Middleton, and others, and among other things
about a very rich widow, young and handsome, of one Sir Nicholas Gold's,
a merchant, lately fallen, and of great courtiers that already look
after her: her husband not dead a week yet. She is reckoned worth
L80,000. Thence to my uncle Wight's, where Dr. of-----, among others,
dined, and his wife, a seeming proud conceited woman, I know not what to
make of her, but the Dr's. discourse did please me very well about the
disease of the stone, above all things extolling Turpentine, which he
told me how it may be taken in pills with great ease. There was brought
to table a hot pie made of a swan I sent them yesterday, given me by Mr.
Howe, but we did not eat any of it. But my wife and I rose from table,
pretending business, and went to the Duke's house, the first play I have
been at these six months, according to my last vowe, and here saw the
so much cried-up play of "Henry the Eighth;" which, though I went with
resolution to like it, is so simple a thing made up of a great many
patches, that, besides the shows and processions in it, there is nothing
in the world good or well done. Thence mightily dissatisfied back at
night to my uncle Wight's, and supped with them, but against my stomach
out of the offence the sight of my aunt's hands gives me, and ending
supper with a mighty laugh, the greatest I have had these many months,
at my uncle's being out in his grace after meat, we rose and broke up,
and my wife and I home and to bed, being sleepy since last night.

2nd. Up and to the office, and there sitting all the morning, and at
noon to the 'Change, in my going met with Luellin and told him how I had
received a letter and bill for L50 from Mr. Deering, and delivered it
to him, which he told me he would receive for me. To which I consented,
though professed not to desire it if he do not consider himself
sufficiently able by the service I have done, and that it is rather my
desire to have nothing till he be further sensible of my service. From
the 'Change I brought him home and dined with us, and after dinner I
took my wife out, for I do find that I am not able to conquer myself as
to going to plays till I come to some new vowe concerning it, and that I
am now come, that is to say, that I will not see above one in a month
at any of the publique theatres till the sum of 50s. be spent, and then
none before New Year's Day next, unless that I do become worth L1000
sooner than then, and then am free to come to some other terms, and so
leaving him in Lombard Street I took her to the King's house, and there
met Mr. Nicholson, my old colleague, and saw "The Usurper," which is
no good play, though better than what I saw yesterday. However, we rose
unsatisfied, and took coach and home, and I to the office late writing
letters, and so to supper and to bed.

3rd (Lord's day). Lay long in bed, and then rose and with a fire in my
chamber staid within all day, looking over and settling my accounts in
good order, by examining all my books, and the kitchen books, and I find
that though the proper profit of my last year was but L305, yet I did by
other gain make it up L444., which in every part of it was unforeseen
of me, and therefore it was a strange oversight for lack of examining my
expenses that I should spend L690 this year, but for the time to come
I have so distinctly settled all my accounts in writing and the
particulars of all my several layings out, that I do hope I shall
hereafter make a better judgment of my spendings than ever. I dined with
my wife in her chamber, she in bed, and then down again and till 11 at
night, and broke up and to bed with great content, but could not make
an end of writing over my vows as I purposed, but I am agreed in every
thing how to order myself for the year to come, which I trust in God
will be much for my good. So up to prayers and to bed. This evening Sir
W. Pen came to invite me against next Wednesday, being Twelfth day, to
his usual feast, his wedding day.

4th. Up betimes, and my wife being ready, and her mayd Besse and the
girl, I carried them by coach and set them all down in Covent Garden and
there left them, and I to my Lord Sandwich's lodgings, but he not being
up, I to the Duke's chamber, and there by and by to his closett, where
since his lady was ill, a little red bed of velvet is brought for him to
lie alone, which is a very pretty one. After doing business here, I
to my Lord's again, and there spoke with him, and he seems now almost
friends again as he used to be. Here meeting Mr. Pierce, the chyrurgeon,
he told me among other Court newes, how the Queene is very well again,
and the King lay with her on Saturday night last; and that she speaks
now very pretty English, and makes her sense out now and then with
pretty phrazes: as among others this is mightily cried up; that, meaning
to say that she did not like such a horse so well as the rest, he being
too prancing and full of tricks, she said he did make too much
vanity. Thence to the Tennis Court, after I had spent a little time in
Westminster Hall, thinking to have met with Mrs. Lane, but I could not
and am glad of it, and there saw the King play at Tennis and others: but
to see how the King's play was extolled without any cause at all, was
a loathsome sight, though sometimes, indeed, he did play very well and
deserved to be commended; but such open flattery is beastly. Afterwards
to St. James's Parke, being unwilling to go to spend money at the
ordinary, and there spent an hour or two, it being a pleasant day,
seeing people play at Pell Mell; where it pleased me mightily to hear
a gallant, lately come from France, swear at one of his companions for
suffering his man (a spruce blade) to be so saucy as to strike a ball
while his master was playing on the Mall.

     [When Egerton was Bishop of Durham, he often played at bowls with
     his guests on the public days.  On an occasion of this sort, a
     visitor happening to cross the lawn, one of the chaplains exclaimed,
     "You must not shake the green, for the bishop is going to bowl."-B.]

Thence took coach at White Hall and took up my wife, who is mighty sad
to think of her father, who is going into Germany against the Turkes;
but what will become of her brother I know not. He is so idle, and out
of all capacity, I think, to earn his bread. Home and at my office till
is at night making my solemn vowes for the next year, which I trust in
the Lord I shall keep, but I fear I have a little too severely bound
myself in some things and in too many, for I fear I may forget some. But
however, I know the worst, and shall by the blessing of God observe to
perform or pay my forfeits punctually. So home and to bed with my mind
at rest.

5th. Up and to our office, where we sat all the morning, where my head
being willing to take in all business whatever, I am afraid I shall over
clogg myself with it. But however, it is my desire to do my duty and
shall the willinger bear it. At noon home and to the 'Change, where I
met with Luellin, who went off with me and parted to meet again at the
Coffeehouse, but missed. So home and found him there, and Mr. Barrow
came to speak with me, so they both dined with me alone, my wife
not being ready, and after dinner I up in my chamber with Barrow to
discourse about matters of the yard with him, and his design of leaving
the place, which I am sorry for, and will prevent if I can. He being
gone then Luellin did give me the L50 from Mr. Deering, which he do give
me for my pains in his business and what I may hereafter take for him,
though there is not the least word or deed I have yet been guilty of in
his behalf but what I am sure has been to the King's advantage and the
profit of the service, nor ever will. And for this money I never did
condition with him or expected a farthing at the time when I did do him
the service, nor have given any receipt for it, it being brought me by
Luellin, nor do purpose to give him any thanks for it, but will wherein
I can faithfully endeavour to see him have the privilege of his Patent
as the King's merchant. I did give Luellin two pieces in gold for a pair
of gloves for his kindness herein. Then he being gone, I to my
office, where busy till late at night, that through my room being over
confounded in business I could stay there no longer, but went home, and
after a little supper to bed.

6th (Twelfth day). Up and to my office, where very busy all the morning,
being indeed over loaded with it through my own desire of doing all I
can. At noon to the 'Change, but did little, and so home to dinner with
my poor wife, and after dinner read a lecture to her in Geography, which
she takes very prettily and with great pleasure to her and me to teach
her, and so to the office again, where as busy as ever in my life,
one thing after another, and answering people's business, particularly
drawing up things about Mr. Wood's masts, which I expect to have a
quarrel about with Sir W. Batten before it be ended, but I care not. At
night home to my wife, to supper, discourse, prayers, and to bed. This
morning I began a practice which I find by the ease I do it with that I
shall continue, it saving me money and time; that is, to trimme myself
with a razer: which pleases me mightily.

7th. Up, putting on my best clothes and to the office, where all the
morning we sat busy, among other things upon Mr. Wood's performance of
his contract for masts, wherein I was mightily concerned, but I think
was found all along in the right, and shall have my desire in it to the
King's advantage. At noon, all of us to dinner to Sir W. Pen's, where a
very handsome dinner, Sir J. Lawson among others, and his lady and his
daughter, a very pretty lady and of good deportment, with looking upon
whom I was greatly pleased, the rest of the company of the women were
all of our own house, of no satisfaction or pleasure at all. My wife was
not there, being not well enough, nor had any great mind. But to see
how Sir W. Pen imitates me in everything, even in his having his chimney
piece in his dining room the same with that in my wife's closett, and in
every thing else I perceive wherein he can. But to see again how he was
out in one compliment: he lets alone drinking any of the ladies' healths
that were there, my Lady Batten and Lawson, till he had begun with my
Lady Carteret, who was absent, and that was well enough, and then Mr.
Coventry's mistresse, at which he was ashamed, and would not have had
him have drunk it, at least before the ladies present, but his policy,
as he thought, was such that he would do it. After dinner by coach with
Sir G. Carteret and Sir J. Minnes by appointment to Auditor Beale's in
Salisbury Court, and there we did with great content look over some old
ledgers to see in what manner they were kept, and indeed it was in an
extraordinary good method, and such as (at least out of design to keep
them employed) I do persuade Sir J. Minnes to go upon, which will at
least do as much good it may be to keep them for want of something to do
from envying those that do something. Thence calling to see whether Mrs.
Turner was returned, which she is, and I spoke one word only to her, and
away again by coach home and to my office, where late, and then home to
supper and bed.

8th. Up and all the morning at my office and with Sir J. Minnes,
directing him and Mr. Turner about keeping of their books according to
yesterday's work, wherein I shall make them work enough. At noon to the
'Change, and there long, and from thence by appointment took Luellin,
Mount, and W. Symons, and Mr. Pierce, the chirurgeon, home to dinner
with me and were merry. But, Lord! to hear how W. Symons do commend and
look sadly and then talk bawdily and merrily, though his wife was dead
but the other day, would make a dogg laugh. After dinner I did go in
further part of kindness to Luellin for his kindness about Deering's L50
which he procured me the other day of him. We spent all the afternoon
together and then they to cards with my wife, who this day put on her
Indian blue gowne which is very pretty, where I left them for an hour,
and to my office, and then to them again, and by and by they went
away at night, and so I again to my office to perfect a letter to Mr.
Coventry about Department Treasurers, wherein I please myself and hope
to give him content and do the King service therein. So having done, I
home and to teach my wife a new lesson in the globes, and to supper,
and to bed. We had great pleasure this afternoon; among other things, to
talk of our old passages together in Cromwell's time; and how W. Symons
did make me laugh and wonder to-day when he told me how he had
made shift to keep in, in good esteem and employment, through eight
governments in one year (the dear 1659, which were indeed, and he did
name them all), and then failed unhappy in the ninth, viz. that of the
King's coming in. He made good to me the story which Luellin did tell
me the other day, of his wife upon her death-bed; how she dreamt of her
uncle Scobell, and did foretell, from some discourse she had with him,
that she should die four days thence, and not sooner, and did all along
say so, and did so. Upon the 'Change a great talke there was of one Mr.
Tryan, an old man, a merchant in Lyme-Streete, robbed last night (his
man and mayde being gone out after he was a-bed), and gagged and robbed
of L1050 in money and about L4000 in jewells, which he had in his house
as security for money. It is believed by many circumstances that his man
is guilty of confederacy, by their ready going to his secret till in his
desk, wherein the key of his cash-chest lay.

9th. Up (my underlip being mightily swelled, I know not how but by
overrubbing it, it itching) and to the office, where we sat all the
morning, and at noon I home to dinner, and by discourse with my wife
thought upon inviting my Lord Sandwich to a dinner shortly. It will
cost me at least ten or twelve pounds; but, however, some arguments of
prudence I have, which however I shall think again upon before I proceed
to that expence. After dinner by coach I carried my wife and Jane to
Westminster, leaving her at Mr. Hunt's, and I to Westminster Hall, and
there visited Mrs. Lane, and by appointment went out and met her at
the Trumpet, Mrs. Hare's, but the room being damp we went to the Bell
tavern, and there I had her company, but could not do as I used to do
(yet nothing but what was honest)..... So I to talk about her having
Hawley, she told me flatly no, she could not love him. I took occasion
to enquire of Howlett's daughter, with whom I have a mind to meet a
little to see what mettle the young wench is made of, being very pretty,
but she tells me she is already betrothed to Mrs. Michell's son, and
she in discourse tells me more, that Mrs. Michell herself had a daughter
before marriage, which is now near thirty years old, a thing I could not
have believed. Thence leading her to the Hall, I took coach and called
my wife and her mayd, and so to the New Exchange, where we bought
several things of our pretty Mrs. Dorothy Stacy, a pretty woman, and
has the modestest look that ever I saw in my life and manner of speech.
Thence called at Tom's and saw him pretty well again, but has not been
currant. So homeward, and called at Ludgate, at Ashwell's uncle's, but
she was not within, to have spoke to her to have come to dress my
wife at the time my Lord dines here. So straight home, calling for
Walsingham's Manuals at my bookseller's to read but not to buy,
recommended for a pretty book by Sir W. Warren, whose warrant however
I do not much take till I do read it. So home to supper and to bed,
my wife not being very well since she came home, being troubled with a
fainting fit, which she never yet had before since she was my wife.

10th (Lord's day). Lay in bed with my wife till 10 or 11 o'clock, having
been very sleepy all night. So up, and my brother Tom being come to
see me, we to dinner, he telling me how Mrs. Turner found herself
discontented with her late bad journey, and not well taken by them in
the country, they not desiring her coming down, nor the burials of Mr.
Edward Pepys's corps there. After dinner I to the office, where all the
afternoon, and at night my wife and I to my uncle Wight's, and there eat
some of their swan pie, which was good, and I invited them to my house
to eat a roasted swan on Tuesday next, which after I was come home did
make a quarrels between my wife and I, because she had appointed a wish
to-morrow. But, however, we were friends again quickly. So to bed.
All our discourse to-night was Mr. Tryan's late being robbed; and that
Collonell Turner (a mad, swearing, confident fellow, well known by all,
and by me), one much indebted to this man for his very livelihood, was
the man that either did or plotted it; and the money and things are
found in his hand, and he and his wife now in Newgate for it; of which
we are all glad, so very a known rogue he was.

11th. Waked this morning by 4 o'clock by my wife to call the mayds to
their wash, and what through my sleeping so long last night and vexation
for the lazy sluts lying so long again and their great wash, neither my
wife nor I could sleep one winke after that time till day, and then I
rose and by coach (taking Captain Grove with me and three bottles of
Tent, which I sent to Mrs. Lane by my promise on Saturday night last) to
White Hall, and there with the rest of our company to the Duke and did
our business, and thence to the Tennis Court till noon, and there saw
several great matches played, and so by invitation to St. James's;
where, at Mr. Coventry's chamber, I dined with my Lord Barkeley, Sir G.
Carteret, Sir Edward Turner, Sir Ellis Layton, and one Mr. Seymour, a
fine gentleman; were admirable good discourse of all sorts, pleasant and
serious. Thence after dinner to White Hall, where the Duke being busy at
the Guinny business, the Duke of Albemarle, Sir W. Rider, Povy, Sir J.
Lawson and I to the Duke of Albemarle's lodgings, and there did some
business, and so to the Court again, and I to the Duke of York's
lodgings, where the Guinny company are choosing their assistants for
the next year by ballotting. Thence by coach with Sir J. Robinson,
Lieutenant of the Tower, he set me down at Cornhill, but, Lord! the
simple discourse that all the way we had, he magnifying his great
undertakings and cares that have been upon him for these last two years,
and how he commanded the city to the content of all parties, when
the loggerhead knows nothing almost that is sense. Thence to the
Coffee-house, whither comes Sir W. Petty and Captain Grant, and we fell
in talke (besides a young gentleman, I suppose a merchant, his name Mr.
Hill, that has travelled and I perceive is a master in most sorts of
musique and other things) of musique; the universal character; art
of memory; Granger's counterfeiting of hands and other most excellent
discourses to my great content, having not been in so good company a
great while, and had I time I should covet the acquaintance of that
Mr. Hill. This morning I stood by the King arguing with a pretty Quaker
woman, that delivered to him a desire of hers in writing. The King
showed her Sir J. Minnes, as a man the fittest for her quaking religion,
saying that his beard was the stiffest thing about him, and again
merrily said, looking upon the length of her paper, that if all she
desired was of that length she might lose her desires; she modestly
saying nothing till he begun seriously to discourse with her, arguing
the truth of his spirit against hers; she replying still with these
words, "O King!" and thou'd him all along. The general talke of the
towne still is of Collonell Turner, about the robbery; who, it is
thought, will be hanged. I heard the Duke of York tell to-night, how
letters are come that fifteen are condemned for the late plot by the
judges at York; and, among others, Captain Oates, against whom it was
proved that he drew his sword at his going out, and flinging away the
scabbard, said that he would either return victor or be hanged. So home,
where I found the house full of the washing and my wife mighty angry
about Will's being here to-day talking with her mayds, which she
overheard, idling of their time, and he telling what a good mayd my old
Jane was, and that she would never have her like again. At which I was
angry, and after directing her to beat at least the little girl, I went
to the office and there reproved Will, who told me that he went thither
by my wife's order, she having commanded him to come thither on Monday
morning. Now God forgive me! how apt I am to be jealous of her as to
this fellow, and that she must needs take this time, when she knows
I must be gone out to the Duke, though methinks had she that mind she
would never think it discretion to tell me this story of him, to let
me know that he was there, much less to make me offended with him, to
forbid him coming again. But this cursed humour I cannot cool in myself
by all the reason I have, which God forgive me for, and convince me of
the folly of it, and the disquiet it brings me. So home, where, God
be thanked, when I came to speak to my wife my trouble of mind soon
vanished, and to bed. The house foul with the washing and quite out of
order against to-morrow's dinner.

12th. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at noon
to the 'Change awhile, and so home, getting things against dinner ready,
and anon comes my uncle Wight and my aunt, with their cozens Mary and
Robert, and by chance my uncle Thomas Pepys. We had a good dinner, the
chief dish a swan roasted, and that excellent meate. At, dinner and all
day very merry. After dinner to cards, where till evening, then to the
office a little, and to cards again with them, and lost half-a-crowne.
They being gone, my wife did tell me how my uncle did this day accost
her alone, and spoke of his hoping she was with child, and kissing
her earnestly told her he should be very glad of it, and from all
circumstances methinks he do seem to have some intention of good to us,
which I shall endeavour to continue more than ever I did yet. So to my
office till late, and then home to bed, after being at prayers, which is
the first time after my late vowe to say prayers in my family twice in
every week.

13th. Up and to my office a little, and then abroad to many several
places about business, among others to the geometrical instrument
makers, and through Bedlam (calling by the way at an old bookseller's
and there fell into looking over Spanish books and pitched upon some,
till I thought of my oathe when I was going to agree for them, and so
with much ado got myself out of the shop glad at my heart and so away)
to the African House to look upon their book of contracts for several
commodities for my information in the prices we give in the Navy. So to
the Coffee [house] where extraordinary good discourse of Dr. Whistler's'
upon my question concerning the keeping of masts, he arguing against
keeping them dry, by showing the nature of corruption in bodies and the
several ways thereof. So to the 'Change, and thence with Sir W. Rider to
the Trinity House to dinner, and then home and to my office till night,
and then with Mr. Bland to Sir T. Viner's about pieces of eight for Sir
J. Lawson, and so back to my office, and there late upon business, and
so home to supper and to bed.

14th. Up and to the office, where all the morning, and at noon all
of us, viz., Sir G. Carteret and Sir W. Batten at one end, and Mr.
Coventry, Sir J. Minnes and I (in the middle at the other end, being
taught how to sit there all three by my sitting so much the backwarder)
at the other end, to Sir G. Carteret's, and there dined well. Here I saw
Mr. Scott, the bastard that married his youngest daughter. Much pleasant
talk at table, and then up and to the office, where we sat long upon our
design of dividing the Controller's work into some of the rest of our
hands for the better doing of it, but he would not yield to it, though
the simple man knows in his heart that he do not do one part of it. So
he taking upon him to do it all we rose, I vexed at the heart to see the
King's service run after this manner, but it cannot be helped. Thence to
the Old James to the reference about Mr. Bland's business. Sir W.
Rider being now added to us, and I believe we shall soon come to some
determination in it. So home and to my office, did business, and then up
to Sir W. Pen and did express my trouble about this day's business, he
not being there, and plainly told him what I thought of it, and though I
know him a false fellow yet I adventured, as I have done often, to tell
him clearly my opinion of Sir W. Batten and his design in this business,
which is very bad. Hence home, and after a lecture to my wife in her
globes, to prayers and to bed.

15th. Up and to my office, where all the morning, and among other things
Mr. Turner with me, and I did tell him my mind about the Controller his
master and all the office, and my mind touching himself too, as he did
carry himself either well or ill to me and my clerks, which I doubt not
but it will operate well. Thence to the 'Change, and there met my uncle
Wight, who was very kind to me, and would have had me home with him, and
so kind that I begin to wonder and think something of it of good to me.
Thence home to dinner, and after dinner with Mr. Hater by water, and
walked thither and back again from Deptford, where I did do something
checking the iron business, but my chief business was my discourse with
Mr. Hater about what had passed last night and to-day about the office
business, and my resolution to do him all the good I can therein. So
home, and my wife tells me that my uncle Wight hath been with her, and
played at cards with her, and is mighty inquisitive to know whether
she is with child or no, which makes me wonder what his meaning is,
and after all my thoughts, I cannot think, unless it be in order to the
making his will, that he might know how to do by me, and I would to God
my wife had told him that she was.

16th. Up, and having paid some money in the morning to my uncle Thomas
on his yearly annuity, to the office, where we sat all the morning.
At noon I to the 'Change about some pieces of eight for Sir J. Lawson.
There I hear that Collonell Turner is found guilty of felony at the
Sessions in Mr. Tryan's business, which will save his life. So home and
met there J. Hasper come to see his kinswoman our Jane. I made much of
him and made him dine with us, he talking after the old simple manner
that he used to do. He being gone, I by water to Westminster Hall, and
there did see Mrs. Lane..... So by coach home and to my office, where
Browne of the Minerys brought me an Instrument made of a Spyral line
very pretty for all questions in Arithmetique almost, but it must be
some use that must make me perfect in it. So home to supper and to bed,
with my mind 'un peu troubled pour ce que fait' to-day, but I hope it
will be 'la dernier de toute ma vie.'

17th (Lord's day). Up, and I and my wife to church, where Pembleton
appeared, which, God forgive me, did vex me, but I made nothing of it.
So home to dinner, and betimes my wife and I to the French church and
there heard a good sermon, the first time my wife and I were there ever
together. We sat by three sisters, all pretty women. It was pleasant to
hear the reader give notice to them, that the children to be catechized
next Sunday were them of Hounsditch and Blanche Chapiton. Thence home,
and there found Ashwell come to see my wife (we having called at her
lodging the other, day to speak with her about dressing my wife when
my Lord Sandwich dines here), and is as merry as ever, and speaks as
disconcerned for any difference between us on her going away as ever.
She being gone, my wife and I to see Sir W. Pen and there supped with
him much against my stomach, for the dishes were so deadly foule that I
could not endure to look upon them. So after supper home to prayers and
to bed.

18th. Up, being troubled to find my wife so ready to have me go out of
doors. God forgive me for my jealousy! but I cannot forbear, though God
knows I have no reason to do so, or to expect her being so true to me
as I would have her. I abroad to White Hall, where the Court all in
mourning for the Duchesse of Savoy. We did our business with the Duke,
and so I to W. Howe at my Lord's lodgings, not seeing my Lord, he being
abroad, and there I advised with W. Howe about my having my Lord to
dinner at my house, who likes it well, though it troubles me that I
should come to need the advice of such a boy, but for the present it is
necessary. Here I found Mr. Mallard, and had from him a common tune set
by my desire to the Lyra Vyall, which goes most admirably. Thence home
by coach to the 'Change, after having been at the Coffee-house, where I
hear Turner is found guilty of felony and burglary; and strange stories
of his confidence at the barr, but yet great indiscretion in his
argueing. All desirous of his being hanged. So home and found that Will
had been with my wife. But, Lord! why should I think any evil of that;
and yet I cannot forbear it. But upon enquiry, though I found no reason
of doubtfulness, yet I could not bring my nature to any quiet or content
in my wife all day and night, nor though I went with her to divert
myself at my uncle Wight's, and there we played at cards till 12 at
night and went home in a great shower of rain, it having not rained
a great while before. Here was one Mr. Benson, a Dutchman, played and
supped with us, that pretends to sing well, and I expected great matters
but found nothing to be pleased with at all. So home and to bed, yet
troubled in my mind.

19th. Up, without any kindness to my wife, and so to the office, where
we sat all the morning, and at noon I to the 'Change, and thence to Mr.
Cutler's with Sir W. Rider to dinner, and after dinner with him to the
Old James upon our reference of Mr. Bland's, and, having sat there upon
the business half an hour, broke up, and I home and there found Madame
Turner and her sister Dike come to see us, and staid chatting till
night, and so away, and I to my office till very late, and my eyes began
to fail me, and be in pain which I never felt to now-a-days, which I
impute to sitting up late writing and reading by candle-light. So home
to supper and to bed.

20th. Up and by coach to my Lord Sandwich's, and after long staying till
his coming down (he not sending for me up, but it may be he did not know
I was there), he came down, and I walked with him to the Tennis Court,
and there left him, seeing the King play. At his lodgings this morning
there came to him Mr. W. Montague's fine lady, which occasioned my
Lord's calling me to her about some business for a friend of hers
preferred to be a midshipman at sea. My Lord recommended the whole
matter to me. She is a fine confident lady, I think, but not so pretty
as I once thought her. My Lord did also seal a lease for the house he
is now taking in Lincoln's Inn Fields, which stands him in 250 per annum
rent. Thence by water to my brother's, whom I find not well in bed,
sicke, they think, of a consumption, and I fear he is not well, but
do not complain, nor desire to take anything. From him I visited Mr.
Honiwood, who is lame, and to thank him for his visit to me the other
day, but we were both abroad. So to Mr. Commander's in Warwicke Lane, to
speak to him about drawing up my will, which he will meet me about in a
day or two. So to the 'Change and walked home, thence with Sir Richard
Ford, who told me that Turner is to be hanged to-morrow, and with what
impudence he hath carried out his trial; but that last night, when
he brought him newes of his death, he began to be sober and shed some
tears, and he hopes will die a penitent; he having already confessed all
the thing, but says it was partly done for a joke, and partly to get an
occasion of obliging the old man by his care in getting him his things
again, he having some hopes of being the better by him in his estate
at his death. Home to dinner, and after dinner my wife and I by water,
which we have not done together many a day, that is not since last
summer, but the weather is now very warm, and left her at Axe Yard, and
I to White Hall, and meeting Mr. Pierce walked with him an hour in the
Matted Gallery; among other things he tells me that my Lady Castlemaine
is not at all set by by the King, but that he do doat upon Mrs. Stewart
only; and that to the leaving of all business in the world, and to the
open slighting of the Queene; that he values not who sees him or stands
by him while he dallies with her openly; and then privately in her
chamber below, where the very sentrys observe his going in and out; and
that so commonly, that the Duke or any of the nobles, when they would
ask where the King is, they will ordinarily say, "Is the King above, or
below?" meaning with Mrs. Stewart: that the King do not openly disown
my Lady Castlemaine, but that she comes to Court; but that my Lord
FitzHarding and the Hambletons,

     [The three brothers, George Hamilton, James Hamilton, and the Count
     Antoine Hamilton, author of the "Memoires de Grammont."]

and sometimes my Lord Sandwich, they say, have their snaps at her. But
he says my Lord Sandwich will lead her from her lodgings in the darkest
and obscurest manner, and leave her at the entrance into the Queene's
lodgings, that he might be the least observed; that the Duke of Monmouth
the King do still doat on beyond measure, insomuch that the King only,
the Duke of York, and Prince Rupert, and the Duke of Monmouth, do now
wear deep mourning, that is, long cloaks, for the Duchesse of Savoy; so
that he mourns as a Prince of the Blood, while the Duke of York do no
more, and all the nobles of the land not so much; which gives great
offence, and he says the Duke of York do consider. But that the Duke
of York do give himself up to business, and is like to prove a noble
Prince; and so indeed I do from my heart think he will. He says that
it is believed, as well as hoped, that care is taken to lay up a hidden
treasure of money by the King against a bad day, pray God it be so! but
I should be more glad that the King himself would look after business,
which it seems he do not in the least. By and by came by Mr. Coventry,
and so we broke off; and he and I took a turn or two and so parted, and
then my Lord Sandwich came upon me, to speak with whom my business of
coming again to-night to this ende of the town chiefly was, in order to
the seeing in what manner he received me, in order to my inviting him to
dinner to my house, but as well in the morning as now, though I did
wait upon him home and there offered occasion of talk with him, yet he
treated me, though with respect, yet as a stranger, without any of the
intimacy or friendship which he used to do, and which I fear he will
never, through his consciousness of his faults, ever do again. Which I
must confess do trouble me above anything in the world almost, though I
neither do need at present nor fear to need to be so troubled, nay, and
more, though I do not think that he would deny me any friendship now if
I did need it, but only that he has not the face to be free with me, but
do look upon me as a remembrancer of his former vanity, and an espy upon
his present practices, for I perceive that Pickering to-day is great
with him again, and that he has done a great courtesy for Mr. Pierce,
the chirurgeon, to a good value, though both these and none but these
did I mention by name to my Lord in the business which has caused
all this difference between my Lord and me. However, I am resolved to
forbear my laying out my money upon a dinner till I see him in a better
posture, and by grave and humble, though high deportment, to make him
think I do not want him, and that will make him the readier to admit me
to his friendship again, I believe the soonest of anything but downright
impudence, and thrusting myself, as others do, upon him, which yet I
cannot do, not [nor] will not endeavour. So home, calling with my wife
to see my brother again, who was up, and walks up and down the house
pretty well, but I do think he is in a consumption. Home, troubled in
mind for these passages with my Lord, but am resolved to better my case
in my business to make my stand upon my owne legs the better and to
lay up as well as to get money, and among other ways I will have a good
fleece out of Creed's coat ere it be long, or I will have a fall. So
to my office and did some business, and then home to supper and to bed,
after I had by candlelight shaved myself and cut off all my beard clear,
which will make my worke a great deal the less in shaving.

21st. Up, and after sending my wife to my aunt Wight's to get a place to
see Turner hanged, I to the office, where we sat all the morning, and
at noon going to the 'Change; and seeing people flock in the City, I
enquired, and found that Turner was not yet hanged. And so I went among
them to Leadenhall Street, at the end of Lyme Street, near where the
robbery was done; and to St. Mary Axe, where he lived. And there I got
for a shilling to stand upon the wheel of a cart, in great pain, above
an houre before the execution was done; he delaying the time by long
discourses and prayers one after another, in hopes of a reprieve;
but none came, and at last was flung off the ladder in his cloake. A
comely-looked man he was, and kept his countenance to the end: I was
sorry to see him. It was believed there were at least 12 or 14,000
people in the street. So I home all in a sweat, and dined by myself,
and after dinner to the Old James, and there found Sir W. Rider and Mr.
Cutler at dinner, and made a second dinner with them, and anon came
Mr. Bland and Custos, and Clerke, and so we fell to the business of
reference, and upon a letter from Mr. Povy to Sir W. Rider and I telling
us that the King is concerned in it, we took occasion to fling off the
business from off our shoulders and would have nothing to do with it,
unless we had power from the King or Commissioners of Tangier, and I
think it will be best for us to continue of that mind, and to have
no hand, it being likely to go against the King. Thence to the
Coffee-house, and heard the full of Turner's discourse on the cart,
which was chiefly to clear himself of all things laid to his charge but
this fault, for which he now suffers, which he confesses. He deplored
the condition of his family, but his chief design was to lengthen time,
believing still a reprieve would come, though the sheriff advised him
to expect no such thing, for the King was resolved to grant none. After
that I had good discourse with a pretty young merchant with mighty
content. So to my office and did a little business, and then to my aunt
Wight's to fetch my wife home, where Dr. Burnett did tell me how poorly
the sheriffs did endeavour to get one jewell returned by Turner, after
he was convicted, as a due to them, and not to give it to Mr. Tryan,
the true owner, but ruled against them, to their great dishonour.
Though they plead it might be another jewell for ought they know and not
Tryan's. After supper home, and my wife tells me mighty stories of my
uncle's fond and kind discourses to her to-day, which makes me confident
that he has thoughts of kindness for us, he repeating his desire for her
to be with child, for it cannot enter into my head that he should have
any unworthy thoughts concerning her. After doing some business at my
office, I home to supper, prayers, and to bed.

22nd. Up, and it being a brave morning, with a gaily to Woolwich, and
there both at the Ropeyarde and the other yarde did much business, and
thence to Greenwich to see Mr. Pett and others value the carved work
of the "Henrietta" (God knows in an ill manner for the King), and so
to Deptford, and there viewed Sir W. Petty's vessel; which hath an
odd appearance, but not such as people do make of it, for I am of the
opinion that he would never have discoursed so much of it, if it were
not better than other vessels, and so I believe that he was abused the
other day, as he is now, by tongues that I am sure speak before they
know anything good or bad of her. I am sorry to find his ingenuity
discouraged so. So home, reading all the way a good book, and so home to
dinner, and after dinner a lesson on the globes to my wife, and so to my
office till 10 or 11 o'clock at night, and so home to supper and to bed.

23rd. Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning. At noon home
to dinner, where Mr. Hawly came to see us and dined with us, and after
we had dined came Mr. Mallard, and after he had eat something, I brought
down my vyall which he played on, the first maister that ever touched
her yet, and she proves very well and will be, I think, an admirable
instrument. He played some very fine things of his owne, but I was
afeard to enter too far in their commendation for fear he should
offer to copy them for me out, and so I be forced to give or lend him
something. So to the office in the evening, whither Mr. Commander came
to me, and we discoursed about my will, which I am resolved to perfect
the next week by the grace of God. He being gone, I to write letters and
other business late, and so home to supper and to bed.

24th (Lord's day). Lay long in bed, and then up, and being desirous to
perform my vowes that I lately made, among others, to be performed
this month, I did go to my office, and there fell on entering, out of
a bye-book, part of my second journall-book, which hath lain these two
years and more unentered. Upon this work till dinner, and after dinner
to it again till night, and then home to supper, and after supper to
read a lecture to my wife upon the globes, and so to prayers and to bed.
This evening also I drew up a rough draught of my last will to my mind.

25th. Up and by coach to Whitehall to my Lord's lodgings, and seeing
that knowing that I was in the house, my Lord did not nevertheless send
for me up, I did go to the Duke's lodgings, and there staid while he was
making ready, in which time my Lord Sandwich came, and so all into his
closet and did our common business, and so broke up, and I homeward by
coach with Sir W. Batten, and staid at Warwicke Lane and there called
upon Mr. Commander and did give him my last will and testament to write
over in form, and so to the 'Change, where I did several businesses.
So home to dinner, and after I had dined Luellin came and we set him
something to eat, and I left him there with my wife, and to the office
upon a particular meeting of the East India Company, where I think I
did the King good service against the Company in the business of their
sending our ships home empty from the Indies contrary to their contract,
and yet, God forgive me! I found that I could be willing to receive a
bribe if it were offered me to conceal my arguments that I found against
them, in consideration that none of my fellow officers, whose duty it is
more than mine, had ever studied the case, or at this hour do understand
it, and myself alone must do it. That being done Mr. Povy and Bland came
to speak with me about their business of the reference, wherein I shall
have some more trouble, but cannot help it, besides I hope to make some
good use of Mr. Povy to my advantage. So home after business done at my
office, to supper, and then to the globes with my wife, and so to bed.
Troubled a little in mind that my Lord Sandwich should continue this
strangeness to me that methinks he shows me now a days more than while
the thing was fresh.

26th. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning. At noon to the
'Change, after being at the Coffee-house, where I sat by Tom Killigrew,
who told us of a fire last night in my Lady Castlemaine's lodging, where
she bid L40 for one to adventure the fetching of a cabinet out, which
at last was got to be done; and the fire at last quenched without doing
much wrong. To 'Change and there did much business, so home to dinner,
and then to the office all the afternoon. And so at night my aunt Wight
and Mrs. Buggin came to sit with my wife, and I in to them all the
evening, my uncle coming afterward, and after him Mr. Benson the
Dutchman, a frank, merry man. We were very merry and played at cards
till late and so broke up and to bed in good hopes that this my
friendship with my uncle and aunt will end well.

27th. Up and to the office, and at noon to the Coffeehouse, where I sat
with Sir G. Ascue

     [Sir George Ayscue or Askew.  After his return from his imprisonment
     he declined to go to sea again, although he was twice afterwards
     formally appointed.  He sat on the court-martial on the loss of the
     "Defiance" in 1668.]

and Sir William Petty, who in discourse is, methinks, one of the most
rational men that ever I heard speak with a tongue, having all his
notions the most distinct and clear, and, among other things (saying,
that in all his life these three books were the most esteemed and
generally cried up for wit in the world "Religio Medici," "Osborne's
Advice to a Son,"

     [Francis Osborne, an English writer of considerable abilities and
     popularity, was the author of "Advice to a Son," in two parts,
     Oxford, 1656-8, 8vo.  He died in 1659.  He is the same person
     mentioned as "My Father Osborne," October 19th, 1661.--B.]

and "Hudibras "), did say that in these--in the two first
principally--the wit lies, and confirming some pretty sayings, which are
generally like paradoxes, by some argument smartly and pleasantly urged,
which takes with people who do not trouble themselves to examine the
force of an argument, which pleases them in the delivery, upon a subject
which they like; whereas, as by many particular instances of mine, and
others, out of Osborne, he did really find fault and weaken the strength
of many of Osborne's arguments, so as that in downright disputation
they would not bear weight; at least, so far, but that they might be
weakened, and better found in their rooms to confirm what is there said.
He shewed finely whence it happens that good writers are not admired
by the present age; because there are but few in any age that do mind
anything that is abstruse and curious; and so longer before any body do
put the true praise, and set it on foot in the world, the generality
of mankind pleasing themselves in the easy delights of the world, as
eating, drinking, dancing, hunting, fencing, which we see the meanest
men do the best, those that profess it. A gentleman never dances so well
as the dancing master, and an ordinary fiddler makes better musique for
a shilling than a gentleman will do after spending forty, and so in all
the delights of the world almost. Thence to the 'Change, and after doing
much business, home, taking Commissioner Pett with me, and all alone
dined together. He told me many stories of the yard, but I do know him
so well, and had his character given me this morning by Hempson, as well
as my own too of him before, that I shall know how to value any thing he
says either of friendship or other business. He was mighty serious with
me in discourse about the consequence of Sir W. Petty's boat, as
the most dangerous thing in the world, if it should be practised by
endangering our losse of the command of the seas and our trade, while
the Turkes and others shall get the use of them, which, without doubt,
by bearing more sayle will go faster than any other ships, and, not
being of burden, our merchants cannot have the use of them and so will
be at the mercy of their enemies. So that I perceive he is afeard that
the honour of his trade will down, though (which is a truth) he pretends
this consideration to hinder the growth of this invention. He being gone
my wife and I took coach and to Covent Garden, to buy a maske at the
French House, Madame Charett's, for my wife; in the way observing the
streete full of coaches at the new play, "The Indian Queene;" which for
show, they say, exceeds "Henry the Eighth." Thence back to Mrs. Turner's
and sat a while with them talking of plays and I know not what, and
so called to see Tom, but not at home, though they say he is in a deep
consumption, and Mrs. Turner and Dike and they say he will not live two
months to an end. So home and to the office, and then to supper and to
bed.

28th. Up and to the office, where all the morning sitting, and at noon
upon several things to the 'Change, and thence to Sir G. Carteret's
to dinner of my own accord, and after dinner with Mr. Wayth down to
Deptford doing several businesses, and by land back again, it being
very cold, the boat meeting me after my staying a while for him at an
alehouse by Redriffe stairs. So home, and took Will coming out of my
doors, at which I was a little moved, and told my wife of her keeping
him from the office (though God knows my base jealous head was the cause
of it), which she seemed troubled at, and that it was only to discourse
with her about finding a place for her brother. So I to my office late,
Mr. Commander coming to read over my will in order to the engrossing
it, and so he being gone I to other business, among others chiefly upon
preparing matters against Creed for my profit, and so home to supper and
bed, being mightily troubled with my left eye all this evening from some
dirt that is got into it.

29th. Up, and after shaving myself (wherein twice now, one after
another, I have cut myself much, but I think it is from the bluntness of
the razor) there came Mr. Deane to me and staid with me a while talking
about masts, wherein he prepared me in several things against Mr. Wood,
and also about Sir W. Petty's boat, which he says must needs prove a
folly, though I do not think so unless it be that the King will not have
it encouraged. At noon, by appointment, comes Mr. Hartlibb and his wife,
and a little before them Messrs. Langley and Bostocke (old acquaintances
of mine at Westminster, clerks), and after shewing them my house and
drinking they set out by water, my wife and I with them down to Wapping
on board the "Crowne," a merchantman, Captain Floyd, a civil person.
Here was Vice-Admiral Goodson, whom the more I know the more I value for
a serious man and staunch. Here was Whistler the flagmaker, which vexed
me, but it mattered not. Here was other sorry company and the discourse
poor, so that we had no pleasure there at all, but only to see and bless
God to find the difference that is now between our condition and that
heretofore, when we were not only much below Hartlibb in all respects,
but even these two fellows above named, of whom I am now quite ashamed
that ever my education should lead me to such low company, but it is
God's goodness only, for which let him be praised. After dinner I.
broke up and with my wife home, and thence to the Fleece in Cornhill,
by appointment, to meet my Lord Marlborough, a serious and worthy
gentleman, who, after doing our business, about the company, he and they
began to talk of the state of the Dutch in India, which is like to be
in a little time without any controll; for we are lost there, and the
Portuguese as bad. Thence to the Coffee-house, where good discourse,
specially of Lt.-Coll. Baron touching the manners of the Turkes'
Government, among whom he lived long. So to my uncle Wight's, where late
playing at cards, and so home.

30th. Up, and a sorry sermon of a young fellow I knew at Cambridge; but
the day kept solemnly for the King's murder, and all day within doors
making up my Brampton papers, and in the evening Mr. Commander came and
we made perfect and signed and sealed my last will and testament, which
is so to my mind, and I hope to the liking of God Almighty, that I take
great joy in myself that it is done, and by that means my mind in a good
condition of quiett. At night to supper and to bed. This evening, being
in a humour of making all things even and clear in the world, I tore
some old papers; among others, a romance which (under the title of "Love
a Cheate ") I begun ten years ago at Cambridge; and at this time reading
it over to-night I liked it very well, and wondered a little at myself
at my vein at that time when I wrote it, doubting that I cannot do so
well now if I would try.

31st (Lord's day). Up, and in my chamber all day long (but a little
at dinner) settling all my Brampton accounts to this day in very good
order, I having obliged myself by oathe to do that and some other things
within this month, and did also perfectly prepare a state of my estate
and annexed it to my last will and testament, which now is perfect, and,
lastly, I did make up my monthly accounts, and find that I have gained
above L50 this month clear, and so am worth L858 clear, which is the
greatest sum I ever yet was master of, and also read over my usual
vowes, as I do every Lord's day, but with greater seriousness than
ordinary, and I do hope that every day I shall see more and more the
pleasure of looking after my business and laying up of money, and
blessed be God for what I have already been enabled by his grace to do.
So to supper and to bed with my mind in mighty great ease and content,
but my head very full of thoughts and business to dispatch this next
month also, and among others to provide for answering to the Exchequer
for my uncle's being Generall-Receiver in the year 1647, which I am at
present wholly unable to do, but I must find time to look over all his
papers.




FEBRUARY 1663-1664

February 1st. Up (my maids rising early this morning to washing), and
being ready I found Mr. Strutt the purser below with 12 bottles of
sacke, and tells me (which from Sir W. Batten I had heard before) how
young Jack Davis has railed against Sir W. Batten for his endeavouring
to turn him out of his place, at which for the fellow's sake, because it
will likely prove his ruin, I am sorry, though I do believe he is a very
arch rogue. I took Strutt by coach with me to White Hall, where I set
him down, and I to my Lord's, but found him gone out betimes to the
Wardrobe, which I am glad to see that he so attends his business, though
it troubles me that my counsel to my prejudice must be the cause of it.
They tell me that he goes into the country next week, and that the young
ladies come up this week before the old lady. Here I hear how two men
last night, justling for the wall about the New Exchange, did kill one
another, each thrusting the other through; one of them of the King's
Chappell, one Cave, and the other a retayner of my Lord Generall
Middleton's. Thence to White Hall; where, in the Duke's chamber, the
King came and stayed an hour or two laughing at Sir W. Petty, who was
there about his boat; and at Gresham College in general; at which poor
Petty was, I perceive, at some loss; but did argue discreetly, and bear
the unreasonable follies of the King's objections and other bystanders
with great discretion; and offered to take oddes against the King's best
boates; but the King would not lay, but cried him down with words
only. Gresham College he mightily laughed at, for spending time only
in weighing of ayre, and doing nothing else since they sat. Thence to
Westminster Hall, and there met with diverse people, it being terme
time. Among others I spoke with Mrs. Lane, of whom I doubted to hear
something of the effects of our last meeting about a fortnight or three
weeks ago, but to my content did not. Here I met with Mr. Pierce, who
tells me of several passages at Court, among others how the King,
coming the other day to his Theatre to see "The Indian Queene" (which he
commends for a very fine thing), my Lady Castlemaine was in the next box
before he came; and leaning over other ladies awhile to whisper to the
King, she rose out of the box and went into the King's, and set herself
on the King's right hand, between the King and the Duke of York; which,
he swears, put the King himself, as well as every body else, out of
countenance; and believes that she did it only to show the world that
she is not out of favour yet, as was believed. Thence with Alderman
Maynell by his coach to the 'Change, and there with several people busy,
and so home to dinner, and took my wife out immediately to the King's
Theatre, it being a new month, and once a month I may go, and there saw
"The Indian Queene" acted; which indeed is a most pleasant show, and
beyond my expectation; the play good, but spoiled with the ryme, which
breaks the sense. But above my expectation most, the eldest Marshall did
do her part most excellently well as I ever heard woman in my life; but
her voice not so sweet as Ianthe's; but, however, we came home mightily
contented. Here we met Mr. Pickering and his mistress, Mrs. Doll Wilde;
he tells me that the business runs high between the Chancellor and my
Lord Bristoll against the Parliament; and that my Lord Lauderdale and
Cooper open high against the Chancellor; which I am sorry for. In my
way home I 'light and to the Coffee-house, where I heard Lt. Coll. Baron
tell very good stories of his travels over the high hills in Asia above
the clouds, how clear the heaven is above them, how thicke like a mist
the way is through the cloud that wets like a sponge one's clothes,
the ground above the clouds all dry and parched, nothing in the world
growing, it being only a dry earth, yet not so hot above as below the
clouds. The stars at night most delicate bright and a fine clear blue
sky, but cannot see the earth at any time through the clouds, but the
clouds look like a world below you. Thence home and to supper, being
hungry, and so to the office, did business, specially about Creed,
for whom I am now pretty well fitted, and so home to bed. This day in
Westminster Hall W. Bowyer told me that his father is dead lately, and
died by being drowned in the river, coming over in the night; but he
says he had not been drinking. He was taken with his stick in his hand
and cloake over his shoulder, as ruddy as before he died. His horse was
taken overnight in the water, hampered in the bridle, but they were so
silly as not to look for his master till the next morning, that he was
found drowned.

2nd. Up and to the office, where, though Candlemas day, Mr. Coventry
and Sir W. Pen and I all the morning, the others being at a survey at
Deptford. At noon by coach to the 'Change with Mr. Coventry, thence to
the Coffee-house with Captain Coeke, who discoursed well of the good
effects in some kind of a Dutch warr and conquest (which I did not
consider before, but the contrary) that is, that the trade of the world
is too little for us two, therefore one must down: 2ndly, that though
our merchants will not be the better husbands by all this, yet our wool
will bear a better price by vaunting of our cloths, and by that our
tenants will be better able to pay rents, and our lands will be more
worth, and all our owne manufactures, which now the Dutch outvie us in;
that he thinks the Dutch are not in so good a condition as heretofore
because of want of men always, and now from the warrs against the Turke
more than ever. Then to the 'Change again, and thence off to the Sun
Taverne with Sir W. Warren, and with him discoursed long, and had good
advice, and hints from him, and among other things he did give me a
payre of gloves for my wife wrapt up in paper, which I would not open,
feeling it hard; but did tell him that my wife should thank him, and so
went on in discourse. When I came home, Lord! in what pain I was to get
my wife out of the room without bidding her go, that I might see what
these gloves were; and, by and by, she being gone, it proves a payre of
white gloves for her and forty pieces in good gold, which did so cheer
my heart, that I could eat no victuals almost for dinner for joy to
think how God do bless us every day more and more, and more yet I hope
he will upon the increase of my duty and endeavours. I was at great
losse what to do, whether tell my wife of it or no, which I could hardly
forbear, but yet I did and will think of it first before I do, for fear
of making her think me to be in a better condition, or in a better way
of getting money, than yet I am. After dinner to the office, where doing
infinite of business till past to at night to the comfort of my mind,
and so home with joy to supper and to bed. This evening Mr. Hempson came
and told me how Sir W, Batten his master will not hear of continuing him
in his employment as Clerk of the Survey at Chatham, from whence of a
sudden he has removed him without any new or extraordinary cause, and I
believe (as he himself do in part write, and J. Norman do confess) for
nothing but for that he was twice with me the other day and did not wait
upon him. So much he fears me and all that have to do with me. Of this
more in the Mem. Book of my office upon this day, there I shall find it.

3rd. Up, and after a long discourse with my cozen Thomas Pepys, the
executor, I with my wife by coach to Holborn, where I 'light, and she to
her father's, I to the Temple and several places, and so to the 'Change,
where much business, and then home to dinner alone; and so to the Mitre
Taverne by appointment (and there met by chance with W. Howe come to buy
wine for my Lord against his going down to Hinchingbroke, and I private
with him a great while discoursing of my Lord's strangeness to me; but
he answers that I have no reason to think any such thing, but that my
Lord is only in general a more reserved man than he was before) to
meet Sir W. Rider and Mr. Clerke, and there after much ado made an end,
giving Mr. Custos L202 against Mr. Bland, which I endeavoured to bring
down but could not, and think it is well enough ended for Mr. Bland for
all that. Thence by coach to fetch my wife from her brother's, and found
her gone home. Called at Sir Robert Bernard's about surrendering my
estate in reversion to the use of my life, which will be done, and at
Roger Pepys, who was gone to bed in pain of a boyle that he could not
sit or stand. So home, where my wife is full of sad stories of her
good-natured father and roguish brother, who is going for Holland and
his wife, to be a soldier. And so after a little at the office to bed.
This night late coming in my coach, coming up Ludgate Hill, I saw two
gallants and their footmen taking a pretty wench, which I have much
eyed, lately set up shop upon the hill, a seller of riband and gloves.
They seek to drag her by some force, but the wench went, and I believe
had her turn served, but, God forgive me! what thoughts and wishes I had
of being in their place. In Covent Garden to-night, going to fetch home
my wife, I stopped at the great Coffee-house' there, where I never was
before; where Dryden the poet (I knew at Cambridge), and all the wits of
the town, and Harris the player, and Mr. Hoole of our College. And had I
had time then, or could at ether times, it will be good coming thither,
for there, I perceive, is very witty and pleasant discourse. But I could
not tarry, and as it was late, they were all ready to go away.

4th. Up and to the office, where after a while sitting, I left the board
upon pretence of serious business, and by coach to Paul's School, where
I heard some good speeches of the boys that were to be elected
this year. Thence by and by with Mr. Pullen and Barnes (a great
Non-Conformist) with several others of my old acquaintance to the Nag's
Head Taverne, and there did give them a bottle of sacke, and away again
and I to the School, and up to hear the upper form examined; and
there was kept by very many of the Mercers, Clutterbucke, a Barker,
Harrington, and others; and with great respect used by them all, and
had a noble dinner. Here they tell me, that in Dr. Colett's will he says
that he would have a Master found for the School that hath good skill in
Latin, and (if it could be) one that had some knowledge of the Greeke;
so little was Greeke known here at that time. Dr. Wilkins and one Mr.
Smallwood, Posers. After great pleasure there, and specially to Mr.
Crumlum, so often to tell of my being a benefactor to the School, I to
my bookseller's and there spent an hour looking over Theatrum Urbium
and Flandria illustrata, with excellent cuts, with great content. So
homeward, and called at my little milliner's, where I chatted with her,
her husband out of the way, and a mad merry slut she is. So home to
the office, and by and by comes my wife home from the burial of Captain
Grove's wife at Wapping (she telling me a story how her mayd Jane going
into the boat did fall down and show her arse in the boat), and alone
comes my uncle Wight and Mr. Maes with the state of their case, which he
told me very discreetly, and I believe is a very hard one, and so after
drinking a bottle of ale or two they gone, and I a little more to the
office, and so home to prayers and to bed. This evening I made an end of
my letter to Creed about his pieces of eight, and sent it away to him.
I pray God give good end to it to bring me some money, and that duly as
from him.

5th. Up, and down by water, a brave morning, to Woolwich, and there
spent an houre or two to good purpose, and so walked to Greenwich and
thence to Deptford, where I found (with Sir W. Batten upon a survey) Sir
J. Minnes, Sir W. Pen, and my Lady Batten come down and going to dinner.
I dined with them, and so after dinner by water home, all the way going
and coming reading "Faber Fortunae," which I can never read too often.
At home a while with my wife, and so to my office, where till 8 o'clock,
and then home to look over some Brampton papers, and my uncle's accounts
as Generall-Receiver of the County for 1647 of our monthly assessment,
which, contrary to my expectation, I found in such good order and so,
thoroughly that I did not expect, nor could have thought, and that being
done, having seen discharges for every farthing of money he received, I
went to bed late with great quiett.

6th. Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and so at noon
to the 'Change, where I met Mr. Coventry, the first time I ever saw him
there, and after a little talke with him and other merchants, I up and
down about several businesses, and so home, whither came one Father
Fogourdy, an Irish priest, of my wife's and her mother's acquaintance in
France, a sober, discreet person, but one that I would not have converse
with my wife for fear of meddling with her religion, but I like the man
well. Thence with my wife abroad, and left her at Tom's, while I abroad
about several businesses and so back to her, myself being vexed to find
at my first coming Tom abroad, and all his books, papers, and bills
loose upon the open table in the parlour, and he abroad, which I ranted
at him for when he came in. Then by coach home, calling at my cozen
Scott's, who (she) lies dying, they say, upon a miscarriage. My wife
could not be admitted to see her, nor anybody. At home to the office
late writing letters, and then home to supper and to bed. Father
Fogourdy confirms to me the newes that for certain there is peace
between the Pope and King of France.

7th (Lord's day). Up and to church, and thence home, my wife being ill
... kept her bed all day, and I up and dined by her bedside, and then
all the afternoon till late at night writing some letters of business
to my father stating of matters to him in general of great import, and
other letters to ease my mind in the week days that I have not time
to think of, and so up to my wife, and with great mirth read Sir W.
Davenant's two speeches in dispraise of London and Paris, by way of
reproach one to another, and so to prayers and to bed.

8th. Up, and by coach called upon Mr. Phillips, and after a little talk
with him away to my Lord Sandwich's, but he being gone abroad, I staid a
little and talked with Mr. Howe, and so to Westminster in term time,
and there met Mr. Pierce, who told me largely how the King still do doat
upon his women, even beyond all shame; and that the good Queen will of
herself stop before she goes sometimes into her dressing-room, till
she knows whether the King be there, for fear he should be, as she hath
sometimes taken him, with Mrs. Stewart; and that some of the best parts
of the Queen's joynture are, contrary to faith, and against the opinion
of my Lord Treasurer and his Council, bestowed or rented, I know not
how, to my Lord Fitz-Harding and Mrs. Stewart, and others of that crew
that the King do doat infinitely upon the Duke of Monmouth, apparently
as one that he intends to have succeed him. God knows what will be the
end of it! After he was gone I went and talked with Mrs. Lane about
persuading her to Hawly, and think she will come on, which I wish were
done, and so to Mr. Howlett and his wife, and talked about the same, and
they are mightily for it, and I bid them promote it, for I think it will
be for both their goods and my content. But I was much pleased to look
upon their pretty daughter, which is grown a pretty mayd, and will make
a fine modest woman. Thence to the 'Change by coach, and after some
business done, home to dinner, and thence to Guildhall, thinking to have
heard some pleading, but there were no Courts, and so to Cade's, the
stationer, and there did look upon some pictures which he promised to
give me the buying of, but I found he would have played the Jacke with
me, but at last he did proffer me what I expected, and I have laid aside
L10 or L12 worth, and will think of it, but I am loth to lay out so much
money upon them. So home a little vexed in my mind to think how to-day
I was forced to compliment W. Howe and admit myself to an equality with
Mr. Moore, which is come to challenge in his discourse with me, but I
will admit it no more, but let me stand or fall, I will show myself as
strange to them as my Lord do himself to me. After at the office till
9 o'clock, I home in fear of some pain by taking cold, and so to supper
and to bed.

9th. Up and to the office, where sat all the morning. At noon by coach
with Mr. Coventry to the 'Change, where busy with several people.
Great talke of the Dutch proclaiming themselves in India, Lords of the
Southern Seas, and deny traffick there to all ships but their owne, upon
pain of confiscation; which makes our merchants mad. Great doubt of two
ships of ours, the "Greyhound" and another, very rich, coming from the
Streights, for fear of the Turkes. Matters are made up between the Pope
and the King of France; so that now all the doubt is, what the French
will do with their armies. Thence home, and there found Captain Grove in
mourning for his wife, and Hawly, and they dined with me. After dinner,
and Grove gone, Hawly and I talked of his mistress, Mrs. Lane, and I
seriously advising him and inquiring his condition, and do believe that
I shall bring them together. By and by comes Mr. Moore, with whom much
good discourse of my Lord, and among other things told me that my Lord
is mightily altered, that is, grown very high and stately, and do not
admit of any to come into his chamber to him, as heretofore, and that I
must not think much of his strangeness to me, for it was the same he
do to every body, and that he would not have me be solicitous in the
matter, but keep off and give him now and then a visit and no more, for
he says he himself do not go to him now a days but when he sends
for him, nor then do not stay for him if he be not there at the hour
appointed, for, says he, I do find that I can stand upon my own legs
and I will not by any over submission make myself cheap to any body and
contemptible, which was the doctrine of the world that I lacked most,
and shall follow it. I discoursed with him about my money that my Lord
hath, and the L1000 that I stand bound with him in, to my cozen Thomas
Pepys, in both which I will get myself at liberty as soon as I can;
for I do not like his being angry and in debt both together to me; and
besides, I do not perceive he looks after paying his debts, but runs
farther and farther in. He being gone, my wife and I did walk an houre
or two above in our chamber, seriously talking of businesses. I told
her my Lord owed me L700, and shewed her the bond, and how I intended
to carry myself to my Lord. She and I did cast about how to get Captain
Grove for my sister, in which we are mighty earnest at present, and I
think it would be a good match, and will endeavour it. So to my office a
while, then home to supper and to bed.

10th. Up, and by coach to my Lord Sandwich, to his new house, a fine
house, but deadly dear, in Lincoln's Inne Fields, where I found and
spoke a little to him. He is high and strange still, but did ask me how
my wife did, and at parting remembered him to his cozen, which I thought
was pretty well, being willing to flatter myself that in time he will be
well again. Thence home straight and busy all the forenoon, and at noon
with Mr. Bland to Mr. Povy's, but he being at dinner and full of company
we retreated and went into Fleet Street to a friend of his, and after a
long stay, he telling me the long and most perplexed story of Coronell
and Bushell's business of sugars, wherein Parke and Green and Mr. Bland
and 40 more have been so concerned about the King of Portugal's duties,
wherein every party has laboured to cheat another, a most pleasant and
profitable story to hear, and in the close made me understand Mr. Maes'
business better than I did before. By and by dinner came, and after
dinner and good discourse that and such as I was willing for improvement
sake to hear, I went away too to White Hall to a Committee of Tangier,
where I took occasion to demand of Creed whether he had received my
letter, and he told me yes, and that he would answer it, which makes
me much wonder what he means to do with me, but I will be even with him
before I have done, let him make as light of it as he will. Thence to
the Temple, where my cozen Roger Pepys did show me a letter my Father
wrote to him last Terme to shew me, proposing such things about Sturtlow
and a portion for Pall, and I know not what, that vexes me to see him
plotting how to put me to trouble and charge, and not thinking to pay
our debts and legacys, but I will write him a letter will persuade him
to be wiser. So home, and finding my wife abroad (after her coming home
from being with my aunt Wight to-day to buy Lent provisions) gone with
Will to my brother's, I followed them by coach, but found them not,
for they were newly gone home from thence, which troubled me. I to
Sir Robert Bernard's chamber, and there did surrender my reversion in
Brampton lands to the use of my will, which I was glad to have done, my
will being now good in all parts. Thence homewards, calling a little at
the Coffee-house, where a little merry discourse, and so home, where I
found my wife, who says she went to her father's to be satisfied about
her brother, who I found at my house with her. He is going this next
tide with his wife into Holland to seek his fortune. He had taken his
leave of us this morning. I did give my wife 10s. to give him, and a
coat that I had by me, a close-bodied light-coloured cloth coat, with a
gold edgeing in each seam, that was the lace of my wife's best pettycoat
that she had when I married her. I staid not there, but to my office,
where Stanes the glazier was with me till to at night making up his
contract, and, poor man, I made him almost mad through a mistake of
mine, but did afterwards reconcile all, for I would not have the man
that labours to serve the King so cheap above others suffer too much.
He gone I did a little business more, and so home to supper and to bed,
being now pretty well again, the weather being warm. My pain do leave
me without coming to any great excesse, but my cold that I had got I
suppose was not very great, it being only the leaving of my wastecoat
unbuttoned one morning.

11th. Up, after much pleasant discourse with my wife, and to the office,
where we sat all the morning, and did much business, and some much to
my content by prevailing against Sir W. Batten for the King's profit. At
noon home to dinner, my wife and I hand to fist to a very fine pig. This
noon Mr. Falconer came and visited my wife, and brought her a present, a
silver state-cup and cover, value about L3 or L4, for the courtesy I did
him the other day. He did not stay dinner with me. I am almost sorry
for this present, because I would have reserved him for a place to go in
summer a-visiting at Woolwich with my wife.

12th. Up, and ready, did find below Mr. Creed's boy with a letter from
his master for me. So I fell to reading it, and it is by way of stating
the case between S. Pepys and J. Creed most excellently writ, both
showing his stoutness and yet willingness to peace, reproaching me yet
flattering me again, and in a word in as good a manner as I think the
world could have wrote, and indeed put me to a greater stand than ever
I thought I could have been in this matter. All the morning thinking
how to behave myself in the business, and at noon to the Coffee-house;
thence by his appointment met him upon the 'Change, and with him back to
the Coffee-house, where with great seriousness and strangeness on both
sides he said his part and I mine, he sometimes owning my favour and
assistance, yet endeavouring to lessen it, as that the success of his
business was not wholly or very much to be imputed to that assistance: I
to alledge the contrary, and plainly to tell him that from the beginning
I never had it in my mind to do him all that kindnesse for nothing, but
he gaining 5 or L600, I did expect a share of it, at least a real and
not a complimentary acknowledgment of it. In fine I said nothing all the
while that I need fear he can do me more hurt with them than before I
spoke them. The most I told him was after we were come to a peace, which
he asked me whether he should answer the Board's letter or no. I told
him he might forbear it a while and no more. Then he asked how the
letter could be signed by them without their much enquiry. I told him
it was as I worded it and nothing at all else of any moment, whether my
words be ever hereafter spoken of again or no. So that I have the same
neither better nor worse force over him that I had before, if he should
not do his part. And the peace between us was this: Says he after
all, well, says he, I know you will expect, since there must be some
condescension, that it do become me to begin it, and therefore, says he,
I do propose (just like the interstice between the death of the old and
the coming in of the present king, all the time is swallowed up as if
it had never been) so our breach of friendship may be as if it had never
been, that I should lay aside all misapprehensions of him or his first
letter, and that he would reckon himself obliged to show the same
ingenuous acknowledgment of my love and service to him as at the
beginning he ought to have done, before by my first letter I did (as he
well observed) put him out of a capacity of doing it, without seeming
to do it servilely, and so it rests, and I shall expect how he will deal
with me. After that I began to be free, and both of us to discourse of
other things, and he went home with me and dined with me and my wife
and very pleasant, having a good dinner and the opening of my lampry
(cutting a notch on one side), which proved very good. After dinner he
and I to Deptford, walking all the way, where we met Sir W. Petty and I
took him back, and I got him to go with me to his vessel and discourse
it over to me, which he did very well, and then walked back together to
the waterside at Redriffe, with good discourse all the way. So Creed and
I by boat to my house, and thence to coach with my wife and called at
Alderman Backewell's and there changed Mr. Falconer's state-cup, that he
did give us the other day, for a fair tankard. The cup weighed with the
fashion L5 16s., and another little cup that Joyce Norton did give us
17s., both L6 13s.; for which we had the tankard, which came to L6 10s.,
at 5s. 7d. per oz., and 3s. in money, and with great content away thence
to my brother's, Creed going away there, and my brother bringing me
the old silk standard that I lodged there long ago, and then back again
home, and thence, hearing that my uncle Wight had been at my house, I
went to him to the Miter, and there with him and Maes, Norbury, and Mr.
Rawlinson till late eating some pot venison (where the Crowne earthen
pot pleased me mightily), and then homewards and met Mr. Barrow, so
back with him to the Miter and sat talking about his business of his
discontent in the yard, wherein sometimes he was very foolish and
pettish, till 12 at night, and so went away, and I home and up to my
wife a-bed, with my mind ill at ease whether I should think that I had
by this made myself a bad end by missing the certainty of L100 which
I proposed to myself so much, or a good one by easing myself of the
uncertain good effect but the certain trouble and reflection which must
have fallen on me if we had proceeded to a public dispute, ended besides
embarking myself against my Lord, who (which I had forgot) had given him
his hand for the value of the pieces of eight at his rates which were
all false, which by the way I shall take heed to the giving of my Lord
notice of it hereafter whenever he goes out again.

13th. Up, and after I had told my wife in the morning in bed the
passages yesterday with Creed my head and heart was mightily lighter
than they were before, and so up and to the office, and thence, after
sitting, at 11 o'clock with Mr. Coventry to the African House, and
there with Sir W. Ryder by agreement we looked over part of my Lord
Peterborough's accounts, these being by Creed and Vernaty. Anon down
to dinner to a table which Mr. Coventry keeps here, out of his L300
per annum as one of the Assistants to the Royall Company, a very pretty
dinner, and good company, and excellent discourse, and so up again to
our work for an hour till the Company came to having a meeting of their
own, and so we broke up and Creed and I took coach and to Reeves,
the perspective glass maker, and there did indeed see very excellent
microscopes, which did discover a louse or mite or sand most perfectly
and largely. Being sated with that we went away (yet with a good will
were it not for my obligation to have bought one) and walked to the New
Exchange, and after a turn or two and talked I took coach and home, and
so to my office, after I had been with my wife and saw her day's work
in ripping the silke standard, which we brought home last night, and it
will serve to line a bed, or for twenty uses, to our great content. And
there wrote fair my angry letter to my father upon that that he wrote
to my cozen Roger Pepys, which I hope will make him the more carefull
to trust to my advice for the time to come without so many needless
complaints and jealousys, which are troublesome to me because without
reason.

14th (Lord's day). Up and to church alone, where a lazy sermon of Mr.
Mills, upon a text to introduce catechizing in his parish, which I
perceive he intends to begin. So home and very pleasant with my wife at
dinner. All the afternoon at my office alone doing business, and then
in the evening after a walk with my wife in the garden, she and I to my
uncle Wight's to supper, where Mr. Norbury, but my uncle out of tune,
and after supper he seemed displeased mightily at my aunt's desiring
[to] put off a copper kettle, which it seems with great study he had
provided to boil meat in, and now she is put in the head that it is not
wholesome, which vexed him, but we were very merry about it, and by and
by home, and after prayers to bed.

15th. Up, and carrying my wife to my Lord's lodgings left her, and I to
White Hall, to the Duke; where he first put on a periwigg to-day; but
methought his hair cut short in order thereto did look very prettily of
itself, before he put on his periwigg.

     [Charles II. followed his brother in the use of the periwig in the
     following April.]

Thence to his closet and there did our business, and thence Mr. Coventry
and I down to his chamber and spent a little time, and so parted, and
I took my wife homeward, I stopping at the Coffee-house, and thence
a while to the 'Change, where great newes of the arrivall of two rich
ships, the Greyhound and another, which they were mightily afeard of,
and great insurance given, and so home to dinner, and after an houre
with my wife at her globes, I to the office, where very busy till 11
at night, and so home to supper and to bed. This afternoon Sir Thomas
Chamberlin came to the office to me, and showed me several letters from
the East Indys, showing the height that the Dutch are come to there,
showing scorn to all the English, even in our only Factory there of
Surat, beating several men, and hanging the English Standard St. George
under the Dutch flagg in scorn; saying, that whatever their masters do
or say at home, they will do what they list, and will be masters of all
the world there; and have so proclaimed themselves Soveraigne of all the
South Seas; which certainly our King cannot endure, if the Parliament
will give him money. But I doubt and yet do hope they will not yet, till
we are more ready for it.

16th. Up and to the office, where very busy all the morning, and most
with Mr. Wood, I vexing him about his masts. At noon to the 'Change a
little and thence brought Mr. Barrow to dinner with me, where I had
a haunch of venison roasted, given me yesterday, and so had a pretty
dinner, full of discourse of his business, wherein the poor man is
mightily troubled, and I pity him in it, but hope to get him some ease.
He being gone I to the office, where very busy till night, that my uncle
Wight and Mr. Maes came to me, and after discourse about Maes' business
to supper very merry, but my mind upon my business, and so they being
gone I to my Vyall a little, which I have not done some months, I think,
before, and then a little to my office, at 11 at night, and so home and
to bed.

17th. Up, and with my wife, setting her down by her father's in Long
Acre, in so ill looked a place, among all the whore houses, that I was
troubled at it, to see her go thither. Thence I to White Hall and there
walked up and down talking with Mr. Pierce, who tells me of the King's
giving of my Lord Fitz-Harding two leases which belong indeed to the
Queene, worth L20,000 to him; and how people do talk of it, and other
things of that nature which I am sorry to hear. He and I walked round
the Park with great pleasure, and back again, and finding no time to
speak with my Lord of Albemarle, I walked to the 'Change and there met
my wife at our pretty Doll's, and so took her home, and Creed also whom
I met there, and sent her hose, while Creed and I staid on the 'Change,
and by and by home and dined, where I found an excellent mastiffe, his
name Towser, sent me by a chyrurgeon. After dinner I took my wife again
by coach (leaving Creed by the way going to Gresham College, of which he
is now become one of the virtuosos) and to White Hall, where I delivered
a paper about Tangier to my Lord Duke of Albemarle in the council
chamber, and so to Mrs. Hunt's to call my wife, and so by coach straight
home, and at my office till 3 o'clock in the morning, having spent much
time this evening in discourse with Mr. Cutler, who tells me how the
Dutch deal with us abroad and do not value us any where, and how he
and Sir W. Rider have found reason to lay aside Captain Cocke in their
company, he having played some indiscreet and unfair tricks with them,
and has lost himself every where by his imposing upon all the world with
the conceit he has of his own wit, and so has, he tells me, Sir R. Ford
also, both of whom are very witty men. He being gone Sir W. Rider came
and staid with me till about 12 at night, having found ourselves work
till that time, about understanding the measuring of Mr. Wood's masts,
which though I did so well before as to be thought to deal very hardly
against Wood, yet I am ashamed I understand it no better, and do hope
yet, whatever be thought of me, to save the King some more money,
and out of an impatience to breake up with my head full of confused
confounded notions, but nothing brought to a clear comprehension, I was
resolved to sit up and did till now it is ready to strike 4 o'clock, all
alone, cold, and my candle not enough left to light me to my owne house,
and so, with my business however brought to some good understanding, and
set it down pretty clear, I went home to bed with my mind at good quiet,
and the girl sitting up for me (the rest all a-bed). I eat and drank a
little, and to bed, weary, sleepy, cold, and my head akeing.

18th. Called up to the office and much against my will I rose, my head
aching mightily, and to the office, where I did argue to good purpose
for the King, which I have been fitting myself for the last night
against Mr. Wood about his masts, but brought it to no issue. Very full
of business till noon, and then with Mr. Coventry to the African House,
and there fell to my Lord Peterborough's accounts, and by and by to
dinner, where excellent discourse, Sir G. Carteret and others of the
African Company with us, and then up to the accounts again, which were
by and by done, and then I straight home, my head in great pain, and
drowsy, so after doing a little business at the office I wrote to my
father about sending him the mastiff was given me yesterday. I home and
by daylight to bed about 6 o'clock and fell to sleep, wakened about 12
when my wife came to bed, and then to sleep again and so till morning,
and then:

19th. Up in good order in my head again and shaved myself, and then to
the office, whither Mr. Cutler came, and walked and talked with me a
great while; and then to the 'Change together; and it being early, did
tell me several excellent examples of men raised upon the 'Change by
their great diligence and saving; as also his owne fortune, and how
credit grew upon him; that when he was not really worth L1100, he had
credit for L100,000 of Sir W. Rider how he rose; and others. By and by
joyned with us Sir John Bankes; who told us several passages of the East
India Company; and how in his very case, when there was due to him and
Alderman Mico L64,000 from the Dutch for injury done to them in the East
Indys, Oliver presently after the peace, they delaying to pay them the
money, sent them word, that if they did not pay them by such a day, he
would grant letters of mark to those merchants against them; by which
they were so fearful of him, they did presently pay the money every
farthing. By and by, the 'Change filling, I did many businesses, and
about 2 o'clock went off with my uncle Wight to his house, thence by
appointment we took our wives (they by coach with Mr. Mawes) and we
on foot to Mr. Jaggard, a salter, in Thames Street, for whom I did a
courtesy among the poor victuallers, his wife, whom long ago I had seen,
being daughter to old Day, my uncle Wight's master, is a very plain
woman, but pretty children they have. They live methought at first in
but a plain way, but afterward I saw their dinner, all fish, brought in
very neatly, but the company being but bad I had no great pleasure in
it. After dinner I to the office, where we should have met upon business
extraordinary, but business not coming we broke up, and I thither again
and took my wife; and taking a coach, went to visit my Ladys Jemimah
and Paulina Montagu, and Mrs. Elizabeth Dickering, whom we find at their
father's new house

     [The Earl of Sandwich had just moved to a house in Lincoln's Inn
     Fields.  Elizabeth Dickering, who afterwards married John Creed, was
     niece to Lord Sandwich.]

in Lincolne's Inn Fields; but the house all in dirt. They received us
well enough; but I did not endeavour to carry myself over familiarly
with them; and so after a little stay, there coming in presently after
us my Lady Aberguenny and other ladies, we back again by coach, and
visited, my wife did, my she cozen Scott, who is very ill still, and
thence to Jaggard's again, where a very good supper and great store of
plate; and above all after supper Mrs. Jaggard did at my entreaty play
on the Vyall, but so well as I did not think any woman in England could
and but few Maisters, I must confess it did mightily surprise me, though
I knew heretofore that she could play, but little thought so well. After
her I set Maes to singing, but he did it so like a coxcomb that I was
sick of him. About 11 at night I carried my aunt home by coach, and then
home myself, having set my wife down at home by the way. My aunt tells
me they are counted very rich people, worth at least 10 or L12,000, and
their country house all the yeare long and all things liveable, which
mightily surprises me to think for how poore a man I took him when I
did him the courtesy at our office. So after prayers to bed, pleased at
nothing all the day but Mrs. Jaggard playing on the Vyall, and that was
enough to make me bear with all the rest that did not content me.

20th. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at noon to
the 'Change with Mr. Coventry and thence home to dinner, after dinner by
a gaily down to Woolwich, where with Mr. Falconer, and then at the other
yard doing some business to my content, and so walked to Greenwich, it
being a very fine evening and brought right home with me by water, and
so to my office, where late doing business, and then home to supper and
to bed.

21st. (Lord's day). Up, and having many businesses at the office to-day
I spent all the morning there drawing up a letter to Mr. Coventry about
preserving of masts, being collections of my own, and at noon home to
dinner, whither my brother Tom comes, and after dinner I took him up and
read my letter lately of discontent to my father, and he is seemingly
pleased at it, and cries out of my sister's ill nature and lazy life
there. He being gone I to my office again, and there made an end of my
morning's work, and then, after reading my vows of course, home and back
again with Mr. Maes and walked with him talking of his business in the
garden, and he being gone my wife and I walked a turn or two also, and
then my uncle Wight fetching of us, she and I to his house to supper,
and by the way calling on Sir G. Carteret to desire his consent to my
bringing Maes to him, which he agreed to. So I to my uncle's, but staid
a great while vexed both of us for Maes not coming in, and soon he came,
and I with him from supper to Sir G. Carteret, and there did largely
discourse of the business, and I believe he may expect as much favour as
he can do him, though I fear that will not be much. So back, and after
sitting there a good while, we home, and going my wife told me how my
uncle when he had her alone did tell her that he did love her as well
as ever he did, though he did not find it convenient to show it publicly
for reasons on both sides, seeming to mean as well to prevent my
jealousy as his wife's, but I am apt to think that he do mean us well,
and to give us something if he should die without children. So home
to prayers and to bed. My wife called up the people to washing by four
o'clock in the morning; and our little girl Susan is a most admirable
Slut and pleases us mightily, doing more service than both the others
and deserves wages better.

22nd. Up and shaved myself, and then my wife and I by coach out, and I
set her down by her father's, being vexed in my mind and angry with her
for the ill-favoured place, among or near the whore houses, that she is
forced to come to him. So left her there, and I to Sir Th. Warwick's but
did not speak with him. Thence to take a turn in St. James's Park, and
meeting with Anth. Joyce walked with him a turn in the Pell Mell and
so parted, he St. James's ward and I out to Whitehall ward, and so to
a picture-sellers by the Half Moone in the street over against the
Exchange, and there looked over the maps of several cities and did buy
two books of cities stitched together cost me 9s. 6d., and when I came
home thought of my vowe, and paid 5s. into my poor box for it, hoping
in God that I shall forfeit no more in that kind. Thence, meeting Mr.
Moore, and to the Exchange and there found my wife at pretty Doll's,
and thence by coach set her at my uncle Wight's, to go with my aunt to
market once more against Lent, and I to the Coffee-house, and thence
to the 'Change, my chief business being to enquire about the manner of
other countries keeping of their masts wet or dry, and got good advice
about it, and so home, and alone ate a bad, cold dinner, my people being
at their washing all day, and so to the office and all the afternoon
upon my letter to Mr. Coventry about keeping of masts, and ended it very
well at night and wrote it fair over. This evening came Mr. Alsopp the
King's brewer, with whom I spent an houre talking and bewailing the
posture of things at present; the King led away by half-a-dozen men,
that none of his serious servants and friends can come at him. These
are Lauderdale, Buckingham, Hamilton, Fitz-Harding (to whom he hath, it
seems, given L2,000 per annum in the best part of the King's estate);
and that that the old Duke of Buckingham could never get of the King.
Progers is another, and Sir H. Bennett. He loves not the Queen at all,
but is rather sullen to her; and she, by all reports, incapable of
children. He is so fond of the Duke of Monmouth, that every body admires
it; and he says the Duke hath said, that he would be the death of any
man that says the King was not married to his mother: though Alsopp
says, it is well known that she was a common whore before the King lay
with her. But it seems, he says, that the King is mighty kind to these
his bastard children; and at this day will go at midnight to my Lady
Castlemaine's nurses, and take the child and dance it in his arms: that
he is not likely to have his tables up again in his house,--[The tables
at which the king dined in public.-B.]--for the crew that are about
him will not have him come to common view again, but keep him obscurely
among themselves. He hath this night, it seems, ordered that the Hall
(which there is a ball to be in to-night before the King) be guarded, as
the Queen-Mother's is, by his Horse Guards; whereas heretofore they were
by the Lord Chamberlain or Steward, and their people. But it is feared
they will reduce all to the soldiery, and all other places taken away;
and what is worst of all, that he will alter the present militia, and
bring all to a flying army. That my Lord Lauderdale, being Middleton's
enemy, and one that scorns the Chancellor even to open affronts before
the King, hath got the whole power of Scotland into his hand; whereas
the other day he was in a fair way to have had his whole estate, and
honour, and life, voted away from him. That the King hath done himself
all imaginable wrong in the business of my Lord Antrim, in Ireland;
who, though he was the head of rebels, yet he by his letter owns to have
acted by his father's and mother's, and his commissions; but it seems
the truth is, he hath obliged himself, upon the clearing of his estate,
to settle it upon a daughter of the Queene-Mother's (by my Lord Germin,
I suppose,) in marriage, be it to whom the Queene pleases; which is a
sad story. It seems a daughter of the Duke of Lenox's was, by force,
going to be married the other day at Somerset House, to Harry Germin;
but she got away and run to the King, and he says he will protect her.
She is, it seems, very near akin to the King: Such mad doings there are
every day among them! The rape upon a woman at Turnstile the other day,
her husband being bound in his shirt, they both being in bed together,
it being night, by two Frenchmen, who did not only lye with her but
abused her with a linke, is hushed up for L300, being the Queen Mother's
servants. There was a French book in verse, the other day, translated
and presented to the Duke of Monmouth in such a high stile, that the
Duke of York, he tells me, was mightily offended at it. The Duke of
Monmouth's mother's brother hath a place at Court; and being a Welchman
(I think he told me) will talk very broad of the King's being married to
his sister. The King did the other day, at the Council, commit my Lord
Digby's' chaplin, and steward, and another servant, who went upon the
process begun there against their lord, to swear that they saw him at
church, end receive the Sacrament as a Protestant, (which, the judges
said, was sufficient to prove him such in the eye of the law); the King,
I say, did commit them all to the Gate-house, notwithstanding their
pleading their dependance upon him, and the faith they owed him as their
lord, whose bread they eat. And that the King should say, that he would
soon see whether he was King, or Digby. That the Queene-Mother hath
outrun herself in her expences, and is now come to pay very ill, or run
in debt; the money being spent that she received for leases. He believes
there is not any money laid up in bank, as I told him some did hope;
but he says, from the best informers he can assure me there is no such
thing, nor any body that should look after such a thing; and that there
is not now above L80,000 of the Dunkirke money left in stock. That
Oliver in the year when he spent L1,400,000 in the Navy, did spend in
the whole expence of the kingdom L2,600,000. That all the Court are
mad for a Dutch war; but both he and I did concur, that it was a thing
rather to be dreaded than hoped for; unless by the French King's falling
upon Flanders, they and the Dutch should be divided. That our Embassador
had, it is true, an audience; but in the most dishonourable way
that could be; for the Princes of the Blood (though invited by our
Embassador, which was the greatest absurdity that ever Embassador
committed these 400 years) were not there; and so were not said to give
place to our King's Embassador. And that our King did openly say, the
other day in the Privy Chamber, that he would not be hectored out of his
right and preeminencys by the King of France, as great as he was. That
the Pope is glad to yield to a peace with the French (as the newes-book
says), upon the basest terms that ever was. That the talke which these
people about our King, that I named before, have, is to tell him how
neither privilege of Parliament nor City is any thing; but his will is
all, and ought to be so: and their discourse, it seems, when they
are alone, is so base and sordid, that it makes the eares of the very
gentlemen of the back-stairs (I think he called them) to tingle to hear
it spoke in the King's hearing; and that must be very bad indeed. That
my Lord Digby did send to Lisbon a couple of priests, to search out what
they could against the Chancellor concerning the match, as to the point
of his knowing before-hand that the Queene was not capable of bearing
children; and that something was given her to make her so. But as
private as they were, when they came thither they were clapped up
prisoners. That my Lord Digby endeavours what he can to bring the
business into the House of Commons, hoping there to master the
Chancellor, there being many enemies of his there; but I hope the
contrary. That whereas the late King did mortgage 'Clarendon' to
somebody for L20,000, and this to have given it to the Duke of
Albemarle, and he sold it to my Lord Chancellor, whose title of Earldome
is fetched from thence; the King hath this day sent his order to the
Privy Seale for the payment of this L20,000 to my Lord Chancellor, to
clear the mortgage! Ireland in a very distracted condition about the
hard usage which the Protestants meet with, and the too good which the
Catholiques. And from altogether, God knows my heart, I expect nothing
but ruine can follow, unless things are better ordered in a little time.
He being gone my wife came and told me how kind my uncle Wight had been
to her to-day, and that though she says that all his kindness comes from
respect to her she discovers nothing but great civility from him, yet
but what she says he otherwise will tell me, but to-day he told her
plainly that had she a child it should be his heir, and that should I
or she want he would be a good friend to us, and did give my wife
instructions to consent to all his wife says at any time, she being a
pettish woman, which argues a design I think he has of keeping us in
with his wife in order to our good sure, and he declaring her jealous
of him that so he dares not come to see my wife as otherwise he would do
and will endeavour to do. It looks strange putting all together, but yet
I am in hopes he means well. My aunt also is mighty open to my wife and
tells her mighty plain how her husband did intend to double her portion
to her at his death as a jointure. That he will give presently L100 to
her niece Mary and a good legacy at his death, and it seems did as much
to the other sister, which vexed [me] to think that he should bestow so
much upon his wife's friends daily as he do, but it cannot be helped for
the time past, and I will endeavour to remedy it for the time to come.
After all this discourse with my wife at my office alone, she home to
see how the wash goes on and I to make an end of my work, and so home to
supper and to bed.

23rd. Up, it being Shrove Tuesday, and at the office sat all the
morning, at noon to the 'Change and there met with Sir W. Rider, and of
a sudden knowing what I had at home, brought him and Mr. Cutler and Mr.
Cooke, clerk to Mr. Secretary Morrice, a sober and pleasant man, and one
that I knew heretofore, when he was my Lord 's secretary at Dunkirke. I
made much of them and had a pretty dinner for a sudden. We talked very
pleasantly, and they many good discourses of their travels abroad. After
dinner they gone, I to my office, where doing many businesses very late,
but to my good content to see how I grow in estimation every day
more and more, and have things given more oftener than I used to have
formerly, as to have a case of very pretty knives with agate shafts by
Mrs. Russell. So home and to bed. This day, by the blessing of God, I
have lived thirty-one years in the world; and, by the grace of God, I
find myself not only in good health in every thing, and particularly as
to the stone, but only pain upon taking cold, and also in a fair way of
coming to a better esteem and estate in the world, than ever I expected.
But I pray God give me a heart to fear a fall, and to prepare for it!

24th (Ash-Wednesday). Up and by water, it being a very fine morning, to
White Hall, and there to speak with Sir Ph. Warwicke, but he was gone
out to chappell, so I spent much of the morning walking in the Park, and
going to the Queene's chappell, where I staid and saw their masse, till
a man came and bid me go out or kneel down: so I did go out. And thence
to Somerset House; and there into the chappell, where Monsieur d'Espagne
used to preach. But now it is made very fine, and was ten times more
crouded than the Queene's chappell at St. James's; which I wonder at.
Thence down to the garden of Somerset House, and up and down the new
building, which in every respect will be mighty magnificent and costly.
I staid a great while talking with a man in the garden that was sawing
of a piece of marble, and did give him 6d. to drink. He told me much of
the nature and labour of the worke, how he could not saw above 4 inches
of the stone in a day, and of a greater not above one or two, and after
it is sawed, then it is rubbed with coarse and then with finer and finer
sand till they come to putty, and so polish it as smooth as glass. Their
saws have no teeth, but it is the sand only which the saw rubs up and
down that do the thing. Thence by water to the Coffee-house, and there
sat with Alderman Barker talking of hempe and the trade, and thence to
the 'Change a little, and so home and dined with my wife, and then to
the office till the evening, and then walked a while merrily with my
wife in the garden, and so she gone, I to work again till late, and so
home to supper and to bed.

25th. Up and to the office, where we sat, and thence with Mr. Coventry
by coach to the glasshouse and there dined, and both before and after
did my Lord Peterborough's accounts. Thence home to the office, and
there did business till called by Creed, and with him by coach (setting
my wife at my brother's) to my Lord's, and saw the young ladies, and
talked a little with them, and thence to White Hall, a while talking
but doing no business, but resolved of going to meet my Lord tomorrow,
having got a horse of Mr. Coventry to-day. So home, taking up my wife,
and after doing something at my office home, God forgive me, disturbed
in my mind out of my jealousy of my wife tomorrow when I am out of town,
which is a hell to my mind, and yet without all reason. God forgive me
for it, and mend me. So home, and getting my things ready for me, weary
to bed.

26th. Up, and after dressing myself handsomely for riding, I out, and
by water to Westminster, to Mr. Creed's chamber, and after drinking
some chocolate, and playing on the vyall, Mr. Mallard being there, upon
Creed's new vyall, which proves, methinks, much worse than mine, and,
looking upon his new contrivance of a desk and shelves for books, we set
out from an inne hard by, whither Mr. Coventry's horse was carried, and
round about the bush through bad ways to Highgate. Good discourse in the
way had between us, and it being all day a most admirable pleasant day,
we, upon consultation, had stopped at the Cocke, a mile on this side
Barnett, being unwilling to put ourselves to the charge or doubtful
acceptance of any provision against my Lord's coming by, and there got
something and dined, setting a boy to look towards Barnett Hill, against
their coming; and after two or three false alarms, they come, and we met
the coach very gracefully, and I had a kind receipt from both Lord and
Lady as I could wish, and some kind discourse, and then rode by the
coach a good way, and so fell to discoursing with several of the people,
there being a dozen attending the coach, and another for the mayds and
parson. Among others talking with W. Howe, he told me how my Lord in
his hearing the other day did largely tell my Lord Peterborough and Povy
(who went with them down to Hinchinbrooke) how and when he discarded
Creed, and took me to him, and that since the Duke of York has several
times thanked him for me, which did not a little please me, and anon
I desiring Mr. Howe to tell me upon [what] occasion this discourse
happened, he desired me to say nothing of it now, for he would not
have my Lord to take notice of our being together, but he would tell me
another time, which put me into some trouble to think what he meant by
it. But when we came to my Lord's house, I went in; and whether it was
my Lord's neglect, or general indifference, I know not, but he made
me no kind of compliment there; and, methinks, the young ladies look
somewhat highly upon me. So I went away without bidding adieu to
anybody, being desirous not to be thought too servile. But I do hope and
believe that my Lord do yet value me as high as ever, though he dare not
admit me to the freedom he once did, and that my Lady is still the same
woman. So rode home and there found my uncle Wight. 'Tis an odd thing
as my wife tells me his caressing her and coming on purpose to give her
visits, but I do not trouble myself for him at all, but hope the best
and very good effects of it. He being gone I eat something and my
wife. I told all this day's passages, and she to give me very good
and rational advice how to behave myself to my Lord and his family, by
slighting every body but my Lord and Lady, and not to seem to have
the least society or fellowship with them, which I am resolved to do,
knowing that it is my high carriage that must do me good there, and to
appear in good clothes and garbe. To the office, and being weary, early
home to bed.

27th. Up, but weary, and to the office, where we sat all the morning.
Before I went to the office there came Bagwell's wife to me to speak for
her husband. I liked the woman very well and stroked her under the chin,
but could not find in my heart to offer anything uncivil to her, she
being, I believe, a very modest woman. At noon with Mr. Coventry to the
African house, and to my Lord Peterborough's business again, and then to
dinner, where, before dinner, we had the best oysters I have seen this
year, and I think as good in all respects as ever I eat in my life. I
eat a great many. Great, good company at dinner, among others Sir Martin
Noell, who told us the dispute between him, as farmer of the Additional
Duty, and the East India Company, whether callicos be linnen or no;
which he says it is, having been ever esteemed so: they say it is made
of cotton woole, and grows upon trees, not like flax or hempe. But
it was carried against the Company, though they stand out against the
verdict. Thence home and to the office, where late, and so home to
supper and to bed, and had a very pleasing and condescending answer from
my poor father to-day in answer to my angry discontentful letter to him
the other day, which pleases me mightily.

28th (Lord's day). Up and walked to Paul's; and by chance it was an
extraordinary day for the Readers of the Inns of Court and all the
Students to come to church, it being an old ceremony not used these
twenty-five years, upon the first Sunday in Lent. Abundance there was
of Students, more than there was room to seat but upon forms, and the
Church mighty full. One Hawkins preached, an Oxford man. A good sermon
upon these words: "But the wisdom from above is first pure, then
peaceable." Both before and after sermon I was most impatiently troubled
at the Quire, the worst that ever I heard. But what was extraordinary,
the Bishop of London, who sat there in a pew, made a purpose for him by
the pulpitt, do give the last blessing to the congregation; which
was, he being a comely old man, a very decent thing, methought. The
Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir J. Robinson, would needs have me by coach
home with him, and sending word home to my house I did go and dine
with him, his ordinary table being very good, and his lady a very
high-carriaged but comely big woman; I was mightily pleased with her.
His officers of his regiment dined with him. No discourse at table to
any purpose, only after dinner my Lady would needs see a boy which was
represented to her to be an innocent country boy brought up to towne a
day or two ago, and left here to the wide world, and he losing his way
fell into the Tower, which my Lady believes, and takes pity on him, and
will keep him; but though a little boy and but young, yet he tells his
tale so readily and answers all questions so wittily, that for certain
he is an arch rogue, and bred in this towne; but my Lady will not
believe it, but ordered victuals to be given him, and I think will keep
him as a footboy for their eldest son. After dinner to chappell in the
Tower with the Lieutenant, with the keyes carried before us, and
the Warders and Gentleman-porter going before us. And I sat with the
Lieutenant in his pew, in great state, but slept all the sermon. None,
it seems, of the prisoners in the Tower that are there now, though they
may, will come to prayers there. Church being done, I back to Sir John's
house and there left him and home, and by and by to Sir W. Pen, and
staid a while talking with him about Sir J. Minnes his folly in his
office, of which I am sicke and weary to speak of it, and how the King
is abused in it, though Pen, I know, offers the discourse only like a
rogue to get it out of me, but I am very free to tell my mind to him, in
that case being not unwilling he should tell him again if he will or any
body else. Thence home, and walked in the garden by brave moonshine with
my wife above two hours, till past 8 o'clock, then to supper, and after
prayers to bed.

29th. Up and by coach with Sir W. Pen to Charing Cross, and there I
'light, and to Sir Phillip Warwick to visit him and discourse with him
about navy business, which I did at large and he most largely with me,
not only about the navy but about the general Revenue of England, above
two hours, I think, many staying all the while without, but he seemed
to take pains to let me either understand the affairs of the Revenue or
else to be a witness of his pains and care in stating it. He showed me
indeed many excellent collections of the State of the Revenue in former
Kings and the late times, and the present. He showed me how the very
Assessments between 1643 and 1659, which were taxes (besides Excise,
Customes, Sequestrations, Decimations, King and Queene's and Church
Lands, or any thing else but just the Assessments), come to above
fifteen millions. He showed me a discourse of his concerning the
Revenues of this and foreign States. How that of Spayne was great, but
divided with his kingdoms, and so came to little. How that of France
did, and do much exceed ours before for quantity; and that it is at the
will of the Prince to tax what he will upon his people; which is not
here. That the Hollanders have the best manner of tax, which is only
upon the expence of provisions, by an excise; and do conclude that no
other tax is proper for England but a pound-rate, or excise upon the
expence of provisions. He showed me every particular sort of payment
away of money, since the King's coming in, to this day; and told me,
from one to one, how little he hath received of profit from most of
them; and I believe him truly. That the L1,200,000 which the Parliament
with so much ado did first vote to give the King, and since hath been
reexamined by several committees of the present Parliament, is yet above
L300,000 short of making up really to the King the L1,200,000, as by
particulars he showed me.

     [A committee was appointed in September, 1660, to consider the
     subject of the King's revenue, and they "reported to the Commons that
     the average revenue of Charles I., from 1637 to 1641 inclusive, had
     been L895,819, and the average expenditure about L1,110,000.  At
     that time prices were lower and the country less burthened with navy
     and garrisons, among which latter Dunkirk alone now cost more than
     L100,000 a year.  It appeared, therefore, that the least sum to
     which the King could be expected to 'conform his expense' was
     L1,200,000."  Burnet writes, "It was believed that if two millions
     had been asked he could have carried it.  But he (Clarendon) had no
     mind to put the King out of the necessity of having recourse to his
     Parliament."--Lister's Life of Clarendon, vol. ii., pp.  22, 23.]

And in my Lord Treasurer's excellent letter to the King upon this
subject, he tells the King how it was the spending more than the revenue
that did give the first occasion of his father's ruine, and did since
to the rebels; who, he says, just like Henry the Eighth, had great and
sudden increase of wealth, but yet, by overspending, both died poor; and
further tells the King how much of this L1,200,000 depends upon the
life of the Prince, and so must be renewed by Parliament again to
his successor; which is seldom done without parting with some of the
prerogatives of the Crowne; or if denied and he persists to take it of
the people, it gives occasion to a civill war, which may, as it did in
the late business of tonnage and poundage, prove fatal to the Crowne. He
showed me how many ways the Lord Treasurer did take before he moved the
King to farme the Customes in the manner he do, and the reasons that
moved him to do it. He showed the a very excellent argument to prove,
that our importing lesse than we export, do not impoverish the kingdom,
according to the received opinion: which, though it be a paradox, and
that I do not remember the argument, yet methought there was a great
deale in what he said. And upon the whole I find him a most exact and
methodicall man, and of great industry: and very glad that he thought
fit to show me all this; though I cannot easily guess the reason why he
should do it to me, unless from the plainness that he sees I use to
him in telling him how much the King may suffer for our want of
understanding the case of our Treasury. Thence to White Hall (where
my Lord Sandwich was, and gave me a good countenance, I thought),
and before the Duke did our usual business, and so I about several
businesses in the house, and then out to the Mewes with Sir W. Pen. But
in my way first did meet with W. Howe, who did of himself advise me to
appear more free with my Lord and to come to him, for my own strangeness
he tells me he thinks do make my Lord the worse. At the Mewes Sir W. Pen
and Mr. Baxter did shew me several good horses, but Pen, which Sir W.
Pen did give the Duke of York, was given away by the Duke the other day
to a Frenchman, which Baxter is cruelly vexed at, saying that he was the
best horse that he expects a great while to have to do with. Thence I
to the 'Change, and thence to a Coffee-house with Sir W. Warren, and did
talk much about his and Wood's business, and thence homewards, and in my
way did stay to look upon a fire in an Inneyard in Lumbard Streete. But,
Lord! how the mercers and merchants who had warehouses there did carry
away their cloths and silks. But at last it was quenched, and I home to
dinner, and after dinner carried my wife and set her and her two mayds
in Fleete Streete to buy things, and I to White Hall to little purpose,
and so to Westminster Hall, and there talked with Mrs. Lane and Howlett,
but the match with Hawly I perceive will not take, and so I am resolved
wholly to avoid occasion of further ill with her. Thence by water to
Salsbury Court, and found my wife, by agreement, at Mrs. Turner's,
and after a little stay and chat set her and young Armiger down in
Cheapside, and so my wife and I home. Got home before our mayds, who by
and by came with a great cry and fright that they had like to have been
killed by a coach; but, Lord! to see how Jane did tell the story like a
foole and a dissembling fanatique, like her grandmother, but so like a
changeling, would make a man laugh to death almost, and yet be vexed to
hear her. By and by to the office to make up my monthly accounts, which
I make up to-night, and to my great content find myself worth eight
hundred and ninety and odd pounds, the greatest sum I ever yet knew, and
so with a heart at great case to bed.




MARCH 1663-1664

March 1st. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at
noon to the 'Change, and after much business and meeting my uncle Wight,
who told me how Mr. Maes had like to have been trapanned yesterday, but
was forced to run for it; so with Creed and Mr. Hunt home to dinner, and
after a good and pleasant dinner, Mr. Hunt parted, and I took Mr. Creed
and my wife and down to Deptford, it being most pleasant weather, and
there till night discoursing with the officers there about several
things, and so walked home by moonshine, it being mighty pleasant, and
so home, and I to my office, where late about getting myself a thorough
understanding in the business of masts, and so home to bed, my left eye
being mightily troubled with rheum.

2nd. Up, my eye mightily out of order with the rheum that is fallen
down into it, however, I by coach endeavoured to have waited on my Lord
Sandwich, but meeting him in Chancery Lane going towards the City
I stopped and so fairly walked home again, calling at St. Paul's
Churchyarde, and there looked upon a pretty burlesque poem, called
"Scarronides, or Virgile Travesty;" extraordinary good. At home to the
office till dinner, and after dinner my wife cut my hair short, which
is growne pretty long again, and then to the office, and there till 9
at night doing business. This afternoon we had a good present of tongues
and bacon from Mr. Shales, of Portsmouth. So at night home to supper,
and, being troubled with my eye, to bed. This morning Mr. Burgby, one of
the writing clerks belonging to the Council, was with me about business,
a knowing man, he complains how most of the Lords of the Council do look
after themselves and their own ends, and none the publique, unless Sir
Edward Nicholas. Sir G. Carteret is diligent, but all for his own ends
and profit. My Lord Privy Scale, a destroyer of every body's business,
and do no good at all to the publique. The Archbishop of Canterbury
speaks very little, nor do much, being now come to the highest pitch
that he can expect. He tells me, he believes that things will go very
high against the Chancellor by Digby, and that bad things will be
proved. Talks much of his neglecting the King; and making the King to
trot every day to him, when he is well enough to go to visit his cozen
Chief-Justice Hide, but not to the Council or King. He commends my Lord
of Ormond mightily in Ireland; but cries out cruelly of Sir G. Lane for
his corruption; and that he hath done my Lord great dishonour by selling
of places here, which are now all taken away, and the poor wretches
ready to starve. That nobody almost understands or judges of business
better than the King, if he would not be guilty of his father's fault
to be doubtfull of himself, and easily be removed from his own opinion.
That my Lord Lauderdale is never from the King's care nor council, and
that he is a most cunning fellow. Upon the whole, that he finds things
go very bad every where; and even in the Council nobody minds the
publique.

3rd. Up pretty early and so to the office, where we sat all the morning
making a very great contract with Sir W. Warren for provisions for the
yeare coming, and so home to dinner, and there was W. Howe come to dine
with me, and before dinner he and I walked in the garden, and we did
discourse together, he assuring me of what he told me the other day of
my Lord's speaking so highly in my commendation to my Lord Peterborough
and Povy, which speaks my Lord having yet a good opinion of me, and also
how well my Lord and Lady both are pleased with their children's being
at my father's, and when the bigger ladies were there a little while
ago, at which I am very glad. After dinner he went away, I having
discoursed with him about his own proceedings in his studies, and I
observe him to be very considerate and to mind his book in order to
preferring himself by my Lord's favour to something, and I hope to
the outing of Creed in his Secretaryship. For he tells me that he is
confident my Lord do not love him nor will trust him in any secret
matter, he is so cunning and crafty in all he do. So my wife and I out
of doors thinking to have gone to have seen a play, but when we came to
take coach, they tell us there are none this week, being the first of
Lent. But, Lord! to see how impatient I found myself within to see a
play, I being at liberty once a month to see one, and I think it is the
best method I could have taken. But to my office, did very much business
with several people till night, and so home, being unwilling to stay
late because of my eye which is not yet well of the rheum that is fallen
down into it, but to supper and to bed.

4th. Up, my eye being pretty well, and then by coach to my Lord
Sandwich, with whom I spoke, walking a good while with him in
his garden, which and the house is very fine, talking of my Lord
Peterborough's accounts, wherein he is concerned both for the foolery
as also inconvenience which may happen upon my Lord Peterborough's
ill-stating of his matters, so as to have his gaine discovered
unnecessarily. We did talk long and freely that I hope the worst is past
and all will be well. There were several people by trying a new-fashion
gun

     [Many attempts to produce a satisfactory revolver were made in
     former centuries, but it was not till the present one that Colt's
     revolver was invented.  On February 18th, 1661, Edward, Marquis of
     Worcester, obtained Letters Patent for "an invencon to make certeyne
     guns or pistolls which in the tenth parte of one minute of an houre
     may, with a flaske contrived to that purpose, be re-charged the
     fourth part of one turne of the barrell which remaines still fixt,
     fastening it as forceably and effectually as a dozen thrids of any
     scrue, which in the ordinary and usual way require as many turnes."
     On March 3rd, 1664, Abraham Hill obtained Letters Patent for a "gun
     or pistoll for small shott, carrying seaven or eight charges of the
     same in the stocke of the gun."]

brought my Lord this morning, to shoot off often, one after another,
without trouble or danger, very pretty. Thence to the Temple, and there
taking White's boat down to Woolwich, taking Mr. Shish at Deptford in
my way, with whom I had some good discourse of the Navy business. At
Woolwich discoursed with him and Mr. Pett about iron worke and other
businesses, and then walked home, and at Greenwich did observe the
foundation laying of a very great house for the King, which will cost a
great deale of money.

     [Building by John Webb; now a part of Greenwich Hospital.  Evelyn
     wrote in his Diary, October 19th, 1661: "I went to London to visite
     my Lord of Bristoll, having been with Sir John Denham (his Mates
     surveyor) to consult with him about the placing of his palace at
     Greenwich, which I would have had built between the river and the
     Queene's house, so as a large cutt should have let in ye Thames like
     a bay; but Sir John was for setting it in piles at the very brink of
     the water, which I did not assent to and so came away, knowing Sir
     John to be a better poet than architect, tho' he had Mr. Webb (Inigo
     Jones's man) to assist him."]

So home to dinner, and my uncle Wight coming in he along with my wife
and I by coach, and setting him down by the way going to Mr. Maes we
two to my Lord Sandwich's to visit my Lady, with whom I left my wife
discoursing, and I to White Hall, and there being met by the Duke of
Yorke, he called me to him and discoursed a pretty while with me about
the new ship's dispatch building at Woolwich, and talking of the charge
did say that he finds always the best the most cheape, instancing in
French guns, which in France you may buy for 4 pistoles, as good to look
to as others of 16, but not the service. I never had so much discourse
with the Duke before, and till now did ever fear to meet him. He found
me and Mr. Prin together talking of the Chest money, which we are to
blame not to look after. Thence to my Lord's, and took up my wife, whom
my Lady hath received with her old good nature and kindnesse, and so
homewards, and she home, I 'lighting by the way, and upon the 'Change
met my uncle Wight and told him my discourse this afternoon with Sir G.
Carteret in Maes' business, but much to his discomfort, and after a dish
of coffee home, and at my office a good while with Sir W. Warren talking
with great pleasure of many businesses, and then home to supper, my wife
and I had a good fowle to supper, and then I to the office again and so
home, my mind in great ease to think of our coming to so good a respect
with my Lord again, and my Lady, and that my Lady do so much cry up
my father's usage of her children, and the goodness of the ayre there,
found in the young ladies' faces at their return thence, as she says, as
also my being put into the commission of the Fishery,

     [There had been recently established, under the Great Seal of
     England, a Corporation for the Royal Fishing, of which the Duke of
     York was Governor, Lord Craven Deputy-Governor, and the Lord Mayor
     and Chamberlain of London, for the time being, Treasurers, in which
     body was vested the sole power of licensing lotteries ("The Newes,"
     October 6th, 1664).  The original charter (dated April 8th, 1664),
     incorporating James, Duke of York, and thirty-six assistants as
     Governor and Company of the Royal Fishing of Great Britain and
     Ireland, is among the State Papers.  The duke was to be Governor
     till February 26th, 1665]

for which I must give my Lord thanks, and so home to bed, having a great
cold in my head and throat tonight from my late cutting my hair so close
to my head, but I hope it will be soon gone again.

5th. Up and to the office, where, though I had a great cold, I was
forced to speak much upon a publique meeting of the East India Company,
at our office; where our own company was full, and there was also my
Lord George Barkeley, in behalfe of the company of merchants (I suppose
he is on that company), who, hearing my name, took notice of me, and
condoled my cozen Edward Pepys's death, not knowing whose son I was, nor
did demand it of me. We broke up without coming to any conclusion, for
want of my Lord Marlborough. We broke up and I to the 'Change, where
with several people and my uncle Wight to drink a dish of coffee, and so
home to dinner, and then to the office all the afternoon, my eye and my
throat being very bad, and my cold increasing so as I could not speak
almost at all at night. So at night home to supper, that is a posset,
and to bed.

6th (Lord's day). Up, and my cold continuing in great extremity I could
not go out to church, but sat all day (a little time at dinner excepted)
in my closet at the office till night drawing up a second letter to Mr.
Coventry about the measure of masts to my great satisfaction, and so in
the evening home, and my uncle and aunt Wight came to us and supped with
us, where pretty merry, but that my cold put me out of humour. At night
with my cold, and my eye also sore still, to bed.

7th. Up betimes, and the Duke being gone abroad to-day, as we heard by a
messenger, I spent the morning at my office writing fair my yesterday's
work till almost 2 o'clock (only Sir G. Carteret coming I went down a
little way by water towards Deptford, but having more mind to have my
business done I pretended business at the 'Change, and so went into
another boat), and then, eating a bit, my wife and I by coach to the
Duke's house, where we saw "The Unfortunate Lovers;" but I know not
whether I am grown more curious than I was or no, but I was not much
pleased with it, though I know not where to lay the fault, unless it
was that the house was very empty, by reason of a new play at the other
house. Yet here was my Lady Castlemayne in a box, and it was pleasant to
hear an ordinary lady hard by us, that it seems did not know her before,
say, being told who she was, that "she was well enough." Thence home,
and I ended and sent away my letter to Mr. Coventry (having first read
it and had the opinion of Sir W. Warren in the case), and so home to
supper and to bed, my cold being pretty well gone, but my eye remaining
still snare and rhumey, which I wonder at, my right eye ayling nothing.

8th. Up with some little discontent with my wife upon her saying that
she had got and used some puppy-dog water, being put upon it by a desire
of my aunt Wight to get some for her, who hath a mind, unknown to her
husband, to get some for her ugly face. I to the office, where we
sat all the morning, doing not much business through the multitude of
counsellors, one hindering another. It was Mr. Coventry's own saying to
me in his coach going to the 'Change, but I wonder that he did give me
no thanks for my letter last night, but I believe he did only forget it.
Thence home, whither Luellin came and dined with me, but we made no long
stay at dinner; for "Heraclius" being acted, which my wife and I have a
mighty mind to see, we do resolve, though not exactly agreeing with the
letter of my vowe, yet altogether with the sense, to see another this
month, by going hither instead of that at Court, there having been none
conveniently since I made my vowe for us to see there, nor like to be
this Lent, and besides we did walk home on purpose to make this going
as cheap as that would have been, to have seen one at Court, and my
conscience knows that it is only the saving of money and the time also
that I intend by my oaths, and this has cost no more of either, so that
my conscience before God do after good consultation and resolution of
paying my forfeit, did my conscience accuse me of breaking my vowe, I do
not find myself in the least apprehensive that I have done any violence
to my oaths. The play hath one very good passage well managed in it,
about two persons pretending, and yet denying themselves, to be son
to the tyrant Phocas, and yet heire of Mauritius to the crowne. The
garments like Romans very well. The little girle is come to act very
prettily, and spoke the epilogue most admirably. But at the beginning,
at the drawing up of the curtaine, there was the finest scene of the
Emperor and his people about him, standing in their fixed and different
pastures in their Roman habitts, above all that ever I yet saw at any of
the theatres. Walked home, calling to see my brother Tom, who is in bed,
and I doubt very ill of a consumption. To the office awhile, and so home
to supper and to bed.

9th. Up pretty betimes to my office, where all day long, but a little
at home at dinner, at my office finishing all things about Mr. Wood's
contract for masts, wherein I am sure I shall save the King L400 before
I have done. At night home to supper and to bed.

10th. Up and to the office, where all the morning doing business, and at
noon to the 'Change and there very busy, and so home to dinner with my
wife, to a good hog's harslet,

     [Harslet or haslet, the entrails of an animal, especially of a hog,
     as the heart, liver, &c.]

a piece of meat I love, but have not eat of I think these seven years,
and after dinner abroad by coach set her at Mrs. Hunt's and I to White
Hall, and at the Privy Seale I enquired, and found the Bill come for
the Corporation of the Royall Fishery; whereof the Duke of Yorke is made
present Governor, and several other very great persons, to the number
of thirty-two, made his assistants for their lives: whereof, by my Lord
Sandwich's favour, I am one; and take it not only as a matter of honour,
but that, that may come to be of profit to me, and so with great content
went and called my wife, and so home and to the office, where busy late,
and so home to supper and to bed.

11th. Up and by coach to my Lord Sandwich's, who not being up I staid
talking with Mr. Moore till my Lord was ready and come down, and went
directly out without calling for me or seeing any body. I know not
whether he knew I was there, but I am apt to think not, because if he
would have given me that slighting yet he would not have done it
to others that were there. So I went back again doing nothing but
discoursing with Mr. Moore, who I find by discourse to be grown rich,
and indeed not to use me at all with the respect he used to do, but as
his equal. He made me known to their Chaplin, who is a worthy, able
man. Thence home, and by and by to the Coffee-house, and thence to the
'Change, and so home to dinner, and after a little chat with my wife to
the office, where all the afternoon till very late at the office busy,
and so home to supper and to bed, hoping in God that my diligence, as it
is really very useful for the King, so it will end in profit to myself.
In the meantime I have good content in mind to see myself improve every
day in knowledge and being known.

12th. Lay long pleasantly entertaining myself with my wife, and then up
and to the office, where busy till noon, vexed to see how Sir J. Minnes
deserves rather to be pitied for his dotage and folly than employed at
a great salary to ruin the King's business. At noon to the 'Change, and
thence home to dinner, and then down to Deptford, where busy a while,
and then walking home it fell hard a raining. So at Halfway house put
in, and there meeting Mr. Stacy with some company of pretty women, I
took him aside to a room by ourselves, and there talked with him about
the several sorts of tarrs, and so by and by parted, and I walked home
and there late at the office, and so home to supper and to bed.

13th (Lord's day). Lay long in bed talking with my wife, and then up in
great doubt whether I should not go see Mr. Coventry or no, who hath
not been well these two or three days, but it being foul weather I staid
within, and so to my office, and there all the morning reading some
Common Law, to which I will allot a little time now and then, for I much
want it. At noon home to dinner, and then after some discourse with my
wife, to the office again, and by and by Sir W. Pen came to me after
sermon and walked with me in the garden and then one comes to tell me
that Anthony and Will Joyce were come to see me, so I in to them and
made mighty much of them, and very pleasant we were, and most of their
business I find to be to advise about getting some woman to attend my
brother Tom, whom they say is very ill and seems much to want one. To
which I agreed, and desired them to get their wives to enquire out one.
By and by they bid me good night, but immediately as they were gone out
of doors comes Mrs. Turner's boy with a note to me to tell me that my
brother Tom was so ill as they feared he would not long live, and that
it would be fit I should come and see him. So I sent for them back, and
they came, and Will Joyce desiring to speak with me alone I took him
up, and there he did plainly tell me to my great astonishment that my
brother is deadly ill, and that their chief business of coming was to
tell me so, and what is worst that his disease is the pox, which he hath
heretofore got, and hath not been cured, but is come to this, and that
this is certain, though a secret told his father Fenner by the Doctor
which he helped my brother to. This troubled me mightily, but however
I thought fit to go see him for speech of people's sake, and so walked
along with them, and in our way called on my uncle Fenner (where I have
not been these 12 months and more) and advised with him, and then to my
brother, who lies in bed talking idle. He could only say that he knew
me, and then fell to other discourse, and his face like a dying man,
which Mrs. Turner, who was here, and others conclude he is. The company
being gone, I took the mayde, which seems a very grave and serious
woman, and in W. Joyce's company' did inquire how things are with her
master. She told me many things very discreetly, and said she had all
his papers and books, and key of his cutting house, and showed me a bag
which I and Wm. Joyce told, coming to L5 14s. 0d., which we left with
her again, after giving her good counsel, and the boys, and seeing a
nurse there of Mrs. Holden's choosing, I left them, and so walked home
greatly troubled to think of my brother's condition, and the trouble
that would arise to me by his death or continuing sick. So at home, my
mind troubled, to bed.

14th. Up, and walked to my brother's, where I find he hath continued
talking idly all night, and now knows me not; which troubles me
mightily. So I walked down and discoursed a great while alone with the
mayde, who tells me many passages of her master's practices, and how she
concludes that he has run behind hand a great while and owes money,
and has been dunned by several people, among others by one Cave, both
husband and wife, but whether it was for--[See April 6th]--money or
something worse she knows not, but there is one Cranburne, I think she
called him, in Fleete Lane with whom he hath many times been mighty
private, but what their dealings have been she knows not, but believes
these were naught, and then his sitting up two Saturday nights one after
another when all were abed doing something to himself, which she now
suspects what it was, but did not before, but tells me that he hath been
a very bad husband as to spending his time, and hath often told him of
it, so that upon the whole I do find he is, whether he lives or dies, a
ruined man, and what trouble will befall me by it I know not. Thence
to White Hall; and in the Duke's chamber, while he was dressing, two
persons of quality that were there did tell his Royal Highness how the
other night, in Holborne, about midnight, being at cards, a link-boy
come by and run into the house, and told the people the house was
a-falling. Upon this the whole family was frighted, concluding that the
boy had said that the house was a-fire: so they deft their cards above,
and one would have got out of the balcone, but it was not open; the
other went up to fetch down his children, that were in bed; so all
got clear out of the house. And no sooner so, but the house fell
down indeed, from top to bottom. It seems my Lord Southampton's
canaille--[sewer]--did come too near their foundation, and so weakened
the house, and down it came; which, in every respect, is a most
extraordinary passage. By and by into his closet and did our business
with him. But I did not speed as I expected in a business about the
manner of buying hemp for this year, which troubled me, but it proceeds
only from my pride, that I must needs expect every thing to be ordered
just as I apprehend, though it was not I think from my errour, but their
not being willing to hear and consider all that I had to propose. Being
broke up I followed my Lord Sandwich and thanked him for his putting me
into the Fishery, which I perceive he expected, and cried "Oh!" says he,
"in the Fishery you mean. I told you I would remember you in it," but
offered no other discourse. But demanding whether he had any commands
for me, methought he cried "No!" as if he had no more mind to discourse
with me, which still troubles me and hath done all the day, though
I think I am a fool for it, in not pursuing my resolution of going
handsome in clothes and looking high, for that must do it when all is
done with my Lord. Thence by coach with Sir W. Batten to the city, and
his son Castle, who talks mighty highly against Captain Tayler, calling
him knave, and I find that the old Boating father is led and talks just
as the son do, or the son as the father would have him. 'Light and to
Mr. Moxon's, and there saw our office globes in doing, which will be
very handsome but cost money. So to the Coffee-house, and there very
fine discourse with Mr. Hill the merchant, a pretty, gentile, young, and
sober man. So to the 'Change, and thence home, where my wife and I fell
out about my not being willing to have her have her gowne laced, but
would lay out the same money and more on a plain new one. At this
she flounced away in a manner I never saw her, nor which I could ever
endure. So I away to the office, though she had dressed herself to go
see my Lady Sandwich. She by and by in a rage follows me, and coming
to me tells me in spitefull manner like a vixen and with a look full of
rancour that she would go buy a new one and lace it and make me pay for
it, and then let me burn it if I would after she had done it, and so
went away in a fury. This vexed me cruelly, but being very busy I had,
not hand to give myself up to consult what to do in it, but anon, I
suppose after she saw that I did not follow her, she came again to the
office, where I made her stay, being busy with another, half an houre,
and her stomach coming down we were presently friends, and so after
my business being over at the office we out and by coach to my Lady
Sandwich's, with whom I left my wife, and I to White Hall, where I met
Mr. Delsety, and after an hour's discourse with him met with nobody to
do other business with, but back again to my Lady, and after half an
hour's discourse with her to my brother's, who I find in the same or
worse condition. The doctors give him over and so do all that see him.
He talks no sense two, words together now; and I confess it made me
weepe to see that he should not be able, when I asked him, to say who
I was. I went to Mrs. Turner's, and by her discourse with my brother's
Doctor, Mr. Powell, I find that she is full now of the disease which
my brother is troubled with, and talks of it mightily, which I am sorry
for, there being other company, but methinks it should be for her
honour to forbear talking of it, the shame of this very thing I confess
troubles me as much as anything. Back to my brother's and took my
wife, and carried her to my uncle Fenner's and there had much private
discourse with him. He tells me of the Doctor's thoughts of my brother's
little hopes of recovery, and from that to tell me his thoughts long
of my brother's bad husbandry, and from that to say that he believes he
owes a great deal of money, as to my cozen Scott I know not how much,
and Dr. Thos. Pepys L30, but that the Doctor confesses that he is paid
L20 of it, and what with that and what he owes my father and me I doubt
he is in a very sad condition, that if he lives he will not be able to
show his head, which will be a very great shame to me. After this I went
in to my aunt and my wife and Anthony Joyce and his wife, who were by
chance there, and drank and so home, my mind and head troubled, but I
hope it will [be] over in a little time one way or other. After doing a
little at my office of business I home to supper and to bed. From notice
that my uncle Fenner did give my father the last week of my brother's
condition, my mother is coming up to towne, which also do trouble me.
The business between my Lords Chancellor and Bristoll, they say, is
hushed up; and the latter gone or going, by the King's licence, to
France.

15th. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at noon
comes Madam Turner and her daughter The., her chief errand to tell me
that she had got Dr. Wiverly, her Doctor, to search my brother's mouth,
where Mr. Powell says there is an ulcer, from thence he concludes that
he hath had the pox. But the Doctor swears that there is not, nor ever
was any, and my brother being very sensible, which I was glad to hear,
he did talk with him about it, and he did wholly disclaim that ever
he had the disease, or that ever he said to Powell that he had it. All
which did put me into great comfort as to the reproach which was spread
against him. So I sent for a barrel of oysters, and they dined, and we
were very merry, I being willing to be so upon this news. After dinner
we took coach and to my brother's, where contrary to my expectation he
continues as bad or worse, talking idle, and now not at all knowing any
of us as before. Here we staid a great while, I going up and down the
house looking after things. In the evening Dr. Wiverley came again,
and I sent for Mr. Powell (the Doctor and I having first by ourselves
searched my brother again at his privities, where he was as clear as
ever he was born, and in the Doctor's opinion had been ever so), and we
three alone discoursed the business, where the coxcomb did give us his
simple reasons for what he had said, which the Doctor fully confuted,
and left the fellow only saying that he should cease to report any such
thing, and that what he had said was the best of his judgment from my
brother's words and a ulcer, as he supposed, in his mouth. I threatened
him that I would have satisfaction if I heard any more such discourse,
and so good night to them two, giving the Doctor a piece for his fee,
but the other nothing. I to my brother again, where Madam Turner and her
company, and Mrs. Croxton, my wife, and Mrs. Holding. About 8 o'clock my
brother began to fetch his spittle with more pain, and to speak as much
but not so distinctly, till at last the phlegm getting the mastery of
him, and he beginning as we thought to rattle, I had no mind to see
him die, as we thought he presently would, and so withdrew and led Mrs.
Turner home, but before I came back, which was in half a quarter of an
hour, my brother was dead. I went up and found the nurse holding his
eyes shut, and he poor wretch lying with his chops fallen, a most sad
sight, and that which put me into a present very great transport of
grief and cries, and indeed it was a most sad sight to see the poor
wretch lie now still and dead, and pale like a stone. I staid till he
was almost cold, while Mrs. Croxton, Holden, and the rest did strip and
lay him out, they observing his corpse, as they told me afterwards, to
be as clear as any they ever saw, and so this was the end of my poor
brother, continuing talking idle and his lips working even to his last
that his phlegm hindered his breathing, and at last his breath broke out
bringing a flood of phlegm and stuff out with it, and so he died. This
evening he talked among other talk a great deal of French very plain
and good, as, among others: 'quand un homme boit quand il n'a poynt
d'inclination a boire il ne luy fait jamais de bien.' I once begun to
tell him something of his condition, and asked him whither he thought he
should go. He in distracted manner answered me--"Why, whither should
I go? there are but two ways: If I go, to the bad way I must give God
thanks for it, and if I go the other way I must give God the more thanks
for it; and I hope I have not been so undutifull and unthankfull in my
life but I hope I shall go that way." This was all the sense, good or
bad, that I could get of him this day. I left my wife to see him laid
out, and I by coach home carrying my brother's papers, all I could find,
with me, and having wrote a letter to, my father telling him what hath
been said I returned by coach, it being very late, and dark, to my
brother's, but all being gone, the corpse laid out, and my wife at Mrs.
Turner's, I thither, and there after an hour's talk, we up to bed, my
wife and I in the little blue chamber, and I lay close to my wife, being
full of disorder and grief for my brother that I could not sleep nor
wake with satisfaction, at last I slept till 5 or 6 o'clock.

16th. And then I rose and up, leaving my wife in bed, and to my
brother's, where I set them on cleaning the house, and my wife coming
anon to look after things, I up and down to my cozen Stradwicke's and
uncle Fenner's about discoursing for the funeral, which I am resolved
to put off till Friday next. Thence home and trimmed myself, and then
to the 'Change, and told my uncle Wight of my brother's death, and so by
coach to my cozen Turner's and there dined very well, but my wife.... in
great pain we were forced to rise in some disorder, and in Mrs. Turner's
coach carried her home and put her to bed. Then back again with my cozen
Norton to Mrs. Turner's, and there staid a while talking with Dr. Pepys,
the puppy, whom I had no patience to hear. So I left them and to my
brother's to look after things, and saw the coffin brought; and by and
by Mrs. Holden came and saw him nailed up. Then came W. Joyce to me half
drunk, and much ado I had to tell him the story of my brother's being
found clear of what was said, but he would interrupt me by some idle
discourse or other, of his crying what a good man, and a good speaker
my brother was, and God knows what. At last weary of him I got him away,
and I to Mrs. Turner's, and there, though my heart is still heavy to
think of my poor brother, yet I could give way to my fancy to hear
Mrs. The. play upon the Harpsicon, though the musique did not please me
neither. Thence to my brother's and found them with my mayd Elizabeth
taking an inventory of the goods of the house, which I was well pleased
at, and am much beholden to Mr. Honeywood's man in doing of it. His
name is Herbert, one that says he knew me when he lived with Sir Samuel
Morland, but I have forgot him. So I left them at it, and by coach home
and to my office, there to do a little business, but God knows my heart
and head is so full of my brother's death, and the consequences of it,
that I can do very little or understand it. So home to supper, and
after looking over some business in my chamber I to bed to my wife, who
continues in bed in some pain still. This day I have a great barrel of
oysters given me by Mr. Barrow, as big as 16 of others, and I took it in
the coach with me to Mrs. Turner's, and give them to her. This day the
Parliament met again, after a long prorogation, but what they have done
I have not been in the way to hear.

17th. Up and to my brother's, where all the morning doing business
against to-morrow, and so to my cozen Stradwicke's about the same
business, and to the 'Change, and thence home to dinner, where my wife
in bed sick still, but not so bad as yesterday. I dined by her, and so
to the office, where we sat this afternoon, having changed this day our
sittings from morning to afternoons, because of the Parliament which
returned yesterday; but was adjourned till Monday next; upon pretence
that many of the members were said to be upon the road; and also the
King had other affairs, and so desired them to adjourn till then. But
the truth is, the King is offended at my Lord of Bristol, as they say,
whom he hath found to have been all this while (pretending a desire of
leave to go into France, and to have all the difference between him and
the Chancellor made up,) endeavouring to make factions in both Houses
to the Chancellor. So the King did this to keep the Houses from meeting;
and in the meanwhile sent a guard and a herald last night to have taken
him at Wimbleton, where he was in the morning, but could not find him:
at which the King was and is still mightily concerned, and runs up and
down to and from the Chancellor's like a boy: and it seems would make
Digby's articles against the Chancellor to be treasonable reflections
against his Majesty. So that the King is very high, as they say; and God
knows what will follow upon it! After office I to my brother's again,
and thence to Madam Turner's, in both places preparing things against
to-morrow; and this night I have altered my resolution of burying him
in the church yarde among my young brothers and sisters, and bury him
in the church, in the middle isle, as near as I can to my mother's pew.
This costs me 20s. more. This being all, home by coach, bringing my
brother's silver tankard for safety along with me, and so to supper,
after writing to my father, and so to bed.

18th. Up betimes, and walked to my brother's, where a great while
putting things in order against anon; then to Madam Turner's and eat a
breakfast there, and so to Wotton, my shoemaker, and there got a pair of
shoes blacked on the soles against anon for me; so to my brother's and
to church, and with the grave-maker chose a place for my brother to lie
in, just under my mother's pew. But to see how a man's tombes are at the
mercy of such a fellow, that for sixpence he would, (as his owne words
were,) "I will justle them together but I will make room for him;"
speaking of the fulness of the middle isle, where he was to lie; and
that he would, for my father's sake, do my brother that is dead all the
civility he can; which was to disturb other corps that are not quite
rotten, to make room for him; and methought his manner of speaking it
was very remarkable; as of a thing that now was in his power to do a man
a courtesy or not. At noon my wife, though in pain, comes, but I being
forced to go home, she went back with me, where I dressed myself, and so
did Besse; and so to my brother's again: whither, though invited, as the
custom is, at one or two o'clock, they came not till four or five.
But at last one after another they come, many more than I bid: and my
reckoning that I bid was one hundred and twenty; but I believe there was
nearer one hundred and fifty. Their service was six biscuits apiece, and
what they pleased of burnt claret. My cosen Joyce Norton kept the wine
and cakes above; and did give out to them that served, who had white
gloves given them. But above all, I am beholden to Mrs. Holden, who was
most kind, and did take mighty pains not only in getting the house and
every thing else ready, but this day in going up and down to see, the
house filled and served, in order to mine, and their great content,
I think; the men sitting by themselves in some rooms, and women by
themselves in others, very close, but yet room enough. Anon to church,
walking out into the streete to the Conduit, and so across the streete,
and had a very good company along with the corps. And being come to the
grave as above, Dr. Pierson, the minister of the parish, did read the
service for buriall: and so I saw my poor brother laid into the grave;
and so all broke up; and I and my wife and Madam Turner and her family
to my brother's, and by and by fell to a barrell of oysters, cake, and
cheese, of Mr. Honiwood's, with him, in his chamber and below, being
too merry for so late a sad work. But, Lord! to see how the world makes
nothing of the memory of a man, an houre after he is dead! And, indeed,
I must blame myself; for though at the sight of him dead and dying,
I had real grief for a while, while he was in my sight, yet presently
after, and ever since, I have had very little grief indeed for him.
By and by, it beginning to be late, I put things in some order in the
house, and so took my wife and Besse (who hath done me very good service
in cleaning and getting ready every thing and serving the wine and
things to-day, and is indeed a most excellent good-natured and faithful
wench, and I love her mightily), by coach home, and so after being at
the office to set down the day's work home to supper and to bed.

19th. Up and to the office, where all the morning, and at noon my
wife and I alone, having a good hen, with eggs, to dinner, with great
content. Then by coach to my brother's, where I spent the afternoon
in paying some of the charges of the buriall, and in looking over his
papers, among which I find several letters of my brother John's to him
speaking very foale words of me and my deportment to him here, and very
crafty designs about Sturtlow land and God knows what, which I am very
glad to know, and shall make him repent them. Anon my father and my
brother John came to towne by coach. I sat till night with him, giving
him an account of things. He, poor man, very sad and sickly. I in great
pain by a simple compressing of my cods to-day by putting one leg over
another as I have formerly done, which made me hasten home, and after a
little at the office in great disorder home to bed.

20th (Lord's day). Kept my bed all the morning, having laid a poultice
to my cods last night to take down the tumour there which I got
yesterday, which it did do, being applied pretty warm, and soon after
the beginning of the swelling, and the pain was gone also. We lay
talking all the while, among other things of religion, wherein I am
sorry so often to hear my wife talk of her being and resolving to die a
Catholique,

     [Mrs. Pepys's leaning towards Roman Catholicism was a constant
     trouble to her husband; but, in spite of his fears, she died a
     Protestant (Dr. Milles's certificate.)]

and indeed a small matter, I believe, would absolutely turn her, which
I am sorry for. Up at noon to dinner, and then to my chamber with a fire
till late at night looking over my brother Thomas's papers, sorting of
them, among which I find many base letters of my brother John's to him
against me, and carrying on plots against me to promote Tom's having
of his Banbury' Mistress, in base slighting terms, and in worse of my
sister Pall, such as I shall take a convenient time to make my father
know, and him also to his sorrow. So after supper to bed, our people
rising to wash to-morrow.

21st. Up, and it snowing this morning a little, which from the mildness
of the winter and the weather beginning to be hot and the summer to come
on apace, is a little strange to us. I did not go abroad for fear of my
tumour, for fear it shall rise again, but staid within, and by and by
my father came, poor man, to me, and my brother John. After much talke
and taking them up to my chamber, I did there after some discourse bring
in any business of anger--with John, and did before my father read all
his roguish letters, which troubled my father mightily, especially to
hear me say what I did, against my allowing any thing for the time to
come to him out of my owne purse, and other words very severe, while
he, like a simple rogue, made very silly and churlish answers to me, not
like a man of any goodness or witt, at which I was as much disturbed as
the other, and will be as good as my word in making him to his cost know
that I will remember his carriage to me in this particular the longest
day I live. It troubled me to see my poor father so troubled, whose good
nature did make him, poor wretch, to yield, I believe, to comply with my
brother Tom and him in part of their designs, but without any ill intent
to me, or doubt of me or my good intentions to him or them, though it do
trouble me a little that he should in any manner do it. They dined with
me, and after dinner abroad with my wife to buy some things for her,
and I to the office, where we sat till night, and then, after doing some
business at my closet, I home and to supper and to bed. This day the
Houses of Parliament met; and the King met them, with the Queene with
him. And he made a speech to them:

     [March 16th, 1663-64.  This day both Houses met, and on the gist the
     king opened the session with a speech from the throne, in which
     occurs this Passage: "I pray, Mr. Speaker, and you, gentlemen of the
     House of Commons, give that Triennial Bill once a reading in your
     house, and then, in God's name, do what you think fit for me and
     yourselves and the whole kingdom.  I need not tell you how much I
     love parliaments.  Never king was so much beholden to parliaments as
     I have been, nor do I think the crown can ever be happy without
     frequent parliaments" (Cobbett's "Parliamentary History," vol. iv.,
     cc. 290, 291).]

among other things, discoursing largely of the plots abroad against
him and the peace of the kingdom; and, among other things, that the
dissatisfied party had great hopes upon the effect of the Act for a
Triennial Parliament granted by his father, which he desired them to
peruse, and, I think, repeal. So the Houses did retire to their own
House, and did order the Act to be read to-morrow before them; and I
suppose it will be repealed, though I believe much against the will of a
good many that sit there.

22nd. Up, and spent the whole morning and afternoon at my office,
only in the evening, my wife being at my aunt Wight's, I went thither,
calling at my own house, going out found the parlour curtains drawn,
and inquiring the reason of it, they told me that their mistress had got
Mrs. Buggin's fine little dog and our little bitch, which is proud at
this time, and I am apt to think that she was helping him to line her,
for going afterwards to my uncle Wight's, and supping there with her,
where very merry with Mr. Woolly's drollery, and going home I found the
little dog so little that of himself he could not reach our bitch, which
I am sorry for, for it is the finest dog that ever I saw in my life,
as if he were painted the colours are so finely mixed and shaded. God
forgive me, it went against me to have my wife and servants look upon
them while they endeavoured to do something....

23rd. Up, and going out saw Mrs. Buggin's dog, which proves as I thought
last night so pretty that I took him and the bitch into my closet below,
and by holding down the bitch helped him to line her, which he did very
stoutly, so as I hope it will take, for it is the prettiest dog that
ever I saw. So to the office, where very busy all the morning, and so to
the 'Change, and off hence with Sir W. Rider to the Trinity House, and
there dined very well: and good discourse among the old men of Islands
now and then rising and falling again in the Sea, and that there is many
dangers of grounds and rocks that come just up to the edge almost of
the sea, that is never discovered and ships perish without the world's
knowing the reason of it. Among other things, they observed, that there
are but two seamen in the Parliament house, viz., Sir W. Batten and Sir
W. Pen, and not above twenty or thirty merchants; which is a strange
thing in an island, and no wonder that things of trade go no better nor
are better understood. Thence home, and all the afternoon at the office,
only for an hour in the evening my Lady Jemimah, Paulina, and Madam
Pickering come to see us, but my wife would not be seen, being unready.
Very merry with them; they mightily talking of their thrifty living
for a fortnight before their mother came to town, and other such simple
talk, and of their merry life at Brampton, at my father's, this winter.
So they being gone, to the office again till late, and so home and to
supper and to bed.

24th. Called up by my father, poor man, coming to advise with me about
Tom's house and other matters, and he being gone I down by water to
Greenwich, it being very-foggy, and I walked very finely to Woolwich,
and there did very much business at both yards, and thence walked
back, Captain Grove with me talking, and so to Deptford and did the
like-there, and then walked to Redriffe (calling and eating a bit of
collops and eggs at Half-way house), and so home to the office, where we
sat late, and home weary to supper and to bed.

25th (Lady-day). Up and by water to White Hall, and there to chappell;
where it was most infinite full to hear Dr. Critton. Being not knowne,
some great persons in the pew I pretended to, and went in, did question
my coming in. I told them my pretence; so they turned to the orders of
the chappell, which hung behind upon the wall, and read it; and were
satisfied; but they did not demand whether I was in waiting or no; and
so I was in some fear lest he that was in waiting might come and
betray me. The Doctor preached upon the thirty-first of Jeremy, and the
twenty-first and twenty-second verses, about a woman compassing a man;
meaning the Virgin conceiving and bearing our Saviour. It was the worst
sermon I ever heard him make, I must confess; and yet it was good,
and in two places very bitter, advising the King to do as the Emperor
Severus did, to hang up a Presbyter John (a short coat and a long gowne
interchangeably) in all the Courts of England. But the story of Severus
was pretty, that he hanged up forty senators before the Senate house,
and then made a speech presently to the Senate in praise of his owne
lenity; and then decreed that never any senator after that time should
suffer in the same manner without consent of the Senate: which he
compared to the proceeding of the Long Parliament against my Lord
Strafford. He said the greatest part of the lay magistrates in England
were Puritans, and would not do justice; and the Bishopps, their powers
were so taken away and lessened, that they could not exercise the power
they ought. He told the King and the ladies plainly, speaking of death
and of the skulls and bones of dead men and women,

     [The preacher appears to have had the grave scene in "Hamlet" in
     his mind, as he gives the same illustration of Alexander as Hamlet
     does.]

how there is no difference; that nobody could tell that of the great
Marius or Alexander from a pyoneer; nor, for all the pains the ladies
take with their faces, he that should look in a charnels-house could not
distinguish which was Cleopatra's, or fair Rosamond's, or Jane Shoare's.
Thence by water home. After dinner to the office, thence with my wife to
see my father and discourse how he finds Tom's matters, which he do very
ill, and that he finds him to have been so negligent, that he used to
trust his servants with cutting out of clothes, never hardly cutting out
anything himself; and, by the abstract of his accounts, we find him to
owe above L290, and to be coming to him under L200. Thence home with
my wife, it being very dirty on foot, and bought some fowl in Gracious.
Streets and some oysters against our feast to-morrow. So home, and after
at the office a while, home to supper and to bed.

26th. Up very betimes and to my office, and there read over some papers
against a meeting by and by at this office of Mr. Povy, Sir W. Rider,
Creed, and Vernaty, and Mr. Gauden about my Lord Peterborough's accounts
for Tangier, wherein we proceeded a good way; but, Lord! to see how
ridiculous Mr. Povy is in all he says or do; like a man not more fit for
to be in such employments as he is, and particularly that of Treasurer
(paying many and very great sums without the least written order) as he
is to be King of England, and seems but this day, after much discourse
of mine, to be sensible of that part of his folly, besides a great deal
more in other things. This morning in discourse Sir W. Rider [said],
that he hath kept a journals of his life for almost these forty years,
even to this day and still do, which pleases me mightily. That being
done Sir J. Minnes and I sat all the morning, and then I to the 'Change,
and there got away by pretence of business with my uncle Wight to put
off Creed, whom I had invited to dinner, and so home, and there found
Madam Turner, her daughter The., Joyce Norton, my father and Mr.
Honywood, and by and by come my uncle Wight and aunt. This being my
solemn feast for my cutting of the stone, it being now, blessed be God!
this day six years since the time; and I bless God I do in all respects
find myself free from that disease or any signs of it, more than
that upon the least cold I continue to have pain in making water, by
gathering of wind and growing costive, till which be removed I am at no
ease, but without that I am very well. One evil more I have, which is
that upon the least squeeze almost my cods begin to swell and come to
great pain, which is very strange and troublesome to me, though upon the
speedy applying of a poultice it goes down again, and in two days I am
well again. Dinner not being presently ready I spent some time myself
and shewed them a map of Tangier left this morning at my house by Creed,
cut by our order, the Commissioners, and drawn by Jonas Moore, which is
very pleasant, and I purpose to have it finely set out and hung up. Mrs.
Hunt coming to see my wife by chance dined here with us. After dinner
Sir W. Batten sent to speak with me, and told me that he had proffered
our bill today in the House, and that it was read without any
dissenters, and he fears not but will pass very well, which I shall
be glad of. He told me also how Sir [Richard] Temple hath spoke very
discontentfull words in the House about the Tryennial Bill; but it hath
been read the second time to-day, and committed; and, he believes,
will go on without more ado, though there are many in the House
are displeased at it, though they dare not say much. But above all
expectation, Mr. Prin is the man against it, comparing it to the idoll
whose head was of gold, and his body and legs and feet of different
metal. So this Bill had several degrees of calling of Parliaments, in
case the King, and then the Council, and then the Lord Chancellor, and
then the Sheriffes, should fail to do it. He tells me also, how, upon
occasion of some 'prentices being put in the pillory to-day for beating
of their masters, or some such like thing, in Cheapside, a company of
'prentices came and rescued them, and pulled down the pillory; and they
being set up again, did the like again. So that the Lord Mayor and Major
Generall Browne was fain to come and stay there, to keep the peace; and
drums, all up and down the city, was beat to raise the trained bands,
for to quiett the towne, and by and by, going out with my uncle and aunt
Wight by coach with my wife through Cheapside (the rest of the company
after much content and mirth being broke up), we saw a trained band
stand in Cheapside upon their guard. We went, much against my uncle's
will, as far almost as Hyde Park, he and my aunt falling out all the way
about it, which vexed me, but by this I understand my uncle more than
ever I did, for he was mighty soon angry, and wished a pox take her,
which I was sorry to hear. The weather I confess turning on a sudden to
rain did make it very unpleasant, but yet there was no occasion in the
world for his being so angry, but she bore herself very discreetly, and
I must confess she proves to me much another woman than I thought her,
but all was peace again presently, and so it raining very fast, we met
many brave coaches coming from the Parke and so we turned and set them
down at home, and so we home ourselves, and ended the day with great
content to think how it hath pleased the Lord in six years time to
raise me from a condition of constant and dangerous and most painfull
sicknesse and low condition and poverty to a state of constant health
almost, great honour and plenty, for which the Lord God of heaven make
me truly thankfull. My wife found her gowne come home laced, which is
indeed very handsome, but will cost me a great deal of money, more
than ever I intended, but it is but for once. So to the office and did
business, and then home and to bed.

27th (Lord's day). Lay long in bed wrangling with my wife about the
charge she puts me to at this time for clothes more than I intended, and
very angry we were, but quickly friends again. And so rising and ready I
to my office, and there fell upon business, and then to dinner, and then
to my office again to my business, and by and by in the afternoon walked
forth towards my father's, but it being church time, walked to St.
James's, to try if I could see the belle Butler, but could not; only saw
her sister, who indeed is pretty, with a fine Roman nose. Thence walked
through the ducking-pond fields; but they are so altered since my father
used to carry us to Islington, to the old man's, at the King's Head, to
eat cakes and ale (his name was Pitts) that I did not know which was the
ducking-pond nor where I was. So through F[l]ee[t] lane to my father's,
and there met Mr. Moore, and discoursed with him and my father about who
should administer for my brother Tom, and I find we shall have trouble
in it, but I will clear my hands of it, and what vexed me, my father
seemed troubled that I should seem to rely so wholly upon the advice of
Mr. Moore, and take nobody else, but I satisfied him, and so home; and
in Cheapside, both coming and going, it was full of apprentices, who
have been here all this day, and have done violence, I think, to the
master of the boys that were put in the pillory yesterday. But, Lord!
to see how the train-bands are raised upon this: the drums beating every
where as if an enemy were upon them; so much is this city subject to be
put into a disarray upon very small occasions. But it was pleasant to
hear the boys, and particularly one little one, that I demanded the
business. He told me that that had never been done in the city since it
was a city, two prentices put in the pillory, and that it ought not to
be so. So I walked home, and then it being fine moonshine with my wife
an houre in the garden, talking of her clothes against Easter and about
her mayds, Jane being to be gone, and the great dispute whether Besse,
whom we both love, should be raised to be chamber-mayde or no. We have
both a mind to it, but know not whether we should venture the making
her proud and so make a bad chamber-mayde of a very good natured and
sufficient cook-mayde. So to my office a little, and then to supper,
prayers and to bed.

28th. This is the first morning that I have begun, and I hope shall
continue to rise betimes in the morning, and so up and to my office,
and thence about 7 o'clock to T. Trice, and advised with him about our
administering to my brother Tom, and I went to my father and told him
what to do; which was to administer and to let my cozen Scott have a
letter of Atturny to follow the business here in his absence for him,
who by that means will have the power of paying himself (which we cannot
however hinder) and do us a kindness we think too. But, Lord! what a
shame, methinks, to me, that, in this condition, and at this age, I
should know no better the laws of my owne country! Thence to Westminster
Hall, and spent till noon, it being Parliament time, and at noon walked
with Creed into St. James's Parke, talking of many things, particularly
of the poor parts and great unfitness for business of Mr. Povy, and yet
what a show he makes in the world. Mr. Coventry not being come to his
chamber, I walked through the house with him for an hour in St. James's
fields' talking of the same subject, and then parted, and back and
with great impatience, sometimes reading, sometimes walking, sometimes
thinking that Mr. Coventry, though he invited us to dinner with him, was
gone with the rest of the office without a dinner. At last, at past 4
o'clock I heard that the Parliament was not up yet, and so walked to
Westminster Hall, and there found it so, and meeting with Sir J. Minnes,
and being very hungry, went over with him to the Leg, and before we had
cut a bit, the House rises, however we eat a bit and away to St. James's
and there eat a second part of our dinner with Mr. Coventry and his
brother Harry, Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen. The great matter today in
the House hath been, that Mr. Vaughan, the great speaker, is this day
come to towne, and hath declared himself in a speech of an houre and a
half, with great reason and eloquence, against the repealing of the
Bill for Triennial Parliaments; but with no successe: but the House
have carried it that there shall be such Parliaments, but without any
coercive power upon the King, if he will bring this Act. But, Lord! to
see how the best things are not done without some design; for I perceive
all these gentlemen that I was with to-day were against it (though there
was reason enough on their side); yet purely, I could perceive, because
it was the King's mind to have it; and should he demand any thing else,
I believe they would give it him. But this the discontented Presbyters,
and the faction of the House will be highly displeased with; but it
was carried clearly against them in the House. We had excellent good
table-talke, some of which I have entered in my book of stories. So with
them by coach home, and there find (bye my wife), that Father Fogourdy
hath been with her to-day, and she is mightily for our going to hear a
famous Reule preach at the French Embassador's house: I pray God he do
not tempt her in any matters of religion, which troubles me; and
also, she had messages from her mother to-day, who sent for her old
morning-gown, which was almost past wearing; and I used to call it her
kingdom, from the ease and content she used to have in the wearing of
it. I am glad I do not hear of her begging any thing of more value,
but I do not like that these messages should now come all upon Monday
morning, when my wife expects of course I should be abroad at the
Duke's. To the office, where Mr. Norman came and showed me a design
of his for the storekeeper's books, for the keeping of them regular in
order to a balance, which I am mightily satisfied to see, and shall love
the fellow the better, as he is in all things sober, so particularly for
his endeavour to do something in this thing so much wanted. So late home
to supper and to bed, weary-with walking so long to no purpose in the
Park to-day.

29th. Was called up this morning by a messenger from Sir G. Carteret to
come to him to Sir W. Batten's, and so I rose and thither to him,
and with him and Sir J. Minnes to, Sir G. Carteret's to examine his
accounts, and there we sat at it all the morning. About noon Sir W.
Batten came from the House of Parliament and told us our Bill for our
office was read the second time to-day, with great applause, and is
committed. By and by to dinner, where good cheere, and Sir G. Carteret
in his humour a very good man, and the most kind father and pleased
father in his children that ever I saw. Here is now hung up a picture
of my Lady Carteret, drawn by Lilly, a very fine picture, but yet not
so good as I have seen of his doing. After dinner to the business again
without any intermission till almost night, and then home, and took
coach to my father to see and discourse with him, and so home again and
to my office, where late, and then home to bed.

30th. Up very betimes to my office, and thence at 7 o'clock to Sir G.
Carteret, and there with Sir J. Minnes made an end of his accounts, but
staid not dinner, my Lady having made us drink our morning draft there
of several wines, but I drank: nothing but some of her coffee, which was
poorly made, with a little sugar in it. Thence to the 'Change a great
while, and had good discourse with Captain Cocke at the Coffee-house
about a Dutch warr, and it seems the King's design is by getting
underhand the merchants to bring in their complaints to the Parliament,
to make them in honour begin a warr, which he cannot in honour declare
first, for fear they should not second him with money. Thence homewards,
staying a pretty while with my little she milliner at the end of Birchin
Lane, talking and buying gloves of her, and then home to dinner, and in
the afternoon had a meeting upon the Chest business, but I fear unless
I have time to look after it nothing will be done,, and that I fear I
shall not. In the evening comes Sir W. Batten, who tells us that the
Committee have approved of our bill with very few amendments in words,
not in matter. So to my office, where late with Sir W. Warren, and so
home to supper and to bed.

31st. Up betimes, and to my office, where by and by comes Povy, Sir
W. Rider, Mr. Bland, Creed, and Vernatty, about my Lord Peterborough's
accounts, which we now went through, but with great difficulty, and many
high words between Mr. Povy and I; for I could not endure to see so
many things extraordinary put in, against truthe and reason. He was very
angry, but I endeavoured all I could to profess my satisfaction in my
Lord's part of the accounts, but not in those foolish idle things, they
say I said, that others had put in. Anon we rose and parted, both of us
angry, but I contented, because I knew all of them must know I was in
the right. Then with Creed to Deptford, where I did a great deal of
business enquiring into the business of canvas and other things with
great content, and so walked back again, good discourse between Creed
and I by the way, but most upon the folly of Povy, and at home found
Luellin, and so we to dinner, and thence I to the office, where we sat
all the afternoon late, and being up and my head mightily crowded with
business, I took my wife by coach to see my father. I left her at his
house and went to him to an alehouse hard by, where my cozen Scott was,
and my father's new tenant, Langford, a tailor, to whom I have promised
my custom, and he seems a very modest, carefull young man. Thence my
wife coming with the coach to the alley end I home, and after supper to
the making up my monthly accounts, and to my great content find myself
worth above L900, the greatest sum I ever yet had. Having done my
accounts, late to bed. My head of late mighty full of business, and
with good content to myself in it, though sometimes it troubles me that
nobody else but I should bend themselves to serve the King with that
diligence, whereby much of my pains proves ineffectual.




APRIL 1664

April 1st. Up and to my office, where busy till noon, and then to the
'Change, where I found all the merchants concerned with the presenting
their complaints to the Committee of Parliament appointed to receive
them this afternoon against the Dutch. So home to dinner, and thence by
coach, setting my wife down at the New Exchange, I to White Hall; and
coming too soon for the Tangier Committee walked to Mr. Blagrave for a
song. I left long ago there, and here I spoke with his kinswoman, he
not being within, but did not hear her sing, being not enough acquainted
with her, but would be glad to have her, to come and be at my house a
week now and then. Back to White Hall, and in the Gallery met the Duke
of Yorke (I also saw the Queene going to the Parke, and her Mayds
of Honour: she herself looks ill, and methinks Mrs. Stewart is grown
fatter, and not so fair as she was); and he called me to him, and
discoursed a good while with me; and after he was gone, twice or thrice
staid and called me again to him, the whole length of the house: and
at last talked of the Dutch; and I perceive do much wish that the
Parliament will find reason to fall out with them. He gone, I by and by
found that the Committee of Tangier met at the Duke of Albemarle's, and
so I have lost my labour. So with Creed to the 'Change, and there took
up my wife and left him, and we two home, and I to walk in the garden
with W. Howe, whom we took up, he having been to see us, he tells me
how Creed has been questioned before the Council about a letter that
has been met with, wherein he is mentioned by some fanatiques as a
serviceable friend to them, but he says he acquitted himself well in it,
but, however, something sticks against him, he says, with my Lord, at
which I am not very sorry, for I believe he is a false fellow. I walked
with him to Paul's, he telling me how my Lord is little at home, minds
his carding and little else, takes little notice of any body; but that
he do not think he is displeased, as I fear, with me, but is strange to
all, which makes me the less troubled. So walked back home, and late at
the office. So home and to bed. This day Mrs. Turner did lend me, as
a rarity, a manuscript of one Mr. Wells, writ long ago, teaching the
method of building a ship, which pleases me mightily. I was at it
to-night, but durst not stay long at it, I being come to have a great
pain and water in my eyes after candle-light.

2nd. Up and to my office, and afterwards sat, where great contest with
Sir W. Batten and Mr. Wood, and that doating fool Sir J. Minnes, that
says whatever Sir W. Batten says, though never minding whether to the
King's profit or not. At noon to the Coffee-house, where excellent
discourse with Sir W. Petty, who proposed it as a thing that is truly
questionable, whether there really be any difference between waking
and dreaming, that it is hard not only to tell how we know when we do
a thing really or in a dream, but also to know what the difference [is]
between one and the other. Thence to the 'Change, but having at this
discourse long afterwards with Sir Thomas Chamberlin, who tells me
what I heard from others, that the complaints of most Companies were
yesterday presented to the Committee of Parliament against the Dutch,
excepting that of the East India, which he tells me was because they
would not be said to be the first and only cause of a warr with Holland,
and that it is very probable, as well as most necessary, that we fall
out with that people. I went to the 'Change, and there found most people
gone, and so home to dinner, and thence to Sir W. Warren's, and with
him past the whole afternoon, first looking over two ships' of Captain
Taylor's and Phin. Pett's now in building, and am resolved to learn
something of the art, for I find it is not hard and very usefull, and
thence to Woolwich, and after seeing Mr. Falconer, who is very ill, I
to the yard, and there heard Mr. Pett tell me several things of Sir W.
Batten's ill managements, and so with Sir W. Warren walked to Greenwich,
having good discourse, and thence by water, it being now moonshine and
9 or 10 o'clock at night, and landed at Wapping, and by him and his man
safely brought to my door, and so he home, having spent the day with him
very well. So home and eat something, and then to my office a while, and
so home to prayers and to bed.

3rd (Lord's day). Being weary last night lay long, and called up by W.
Joyce. So I rose, and his business was to ask advice of me, he being
summonsed to the House of Lords to-morrow, for endeavouring to arrest my
Lady Peters

     [Elizabeth, daughter of John Savage, second Earl Rivers, and first
     wife to William, fourth Lord Petre, who was, in 1678, impeached by
     the Commons of high treason, and died under confinement in the
     Tower, January 5th, 1683, s. p.--B.]

for a debt. I did give him advice, and will assist him. He staid all the
morning, but would not dine with me. So to my office and did business.
At noon home to dinner, and being set with my wife in the kitchen my
father comes and sat down there and dined with us. After dinner gives me
an account of what he had done in his business of his house and goods,
which is almost finished, and he the next week expects to be going down
to Brampton again, which I am glad of because I fear the children of my
Lord that are there for fear of any discontent. He being gone I to my
office, and there very busy setting papers in order till late at night,
only in the afternoon my wife sent for me home, to see her new laced
gowne, that is her gown that is new laced; and indeed it becomes her
very nobly, and is well made. I am much pleased with it. At night to
supper, prayers, and to bed.

4th. Up, and walked to my Lord Sandwich's; and there spoke with him
about W. Joyce, who told me he would do what was fit in so tender a
point. I can yet discern a coldness in him to admit me to any discourse
with him. Thence to Westminster, to the Painted Chamber, and there
met the two Joyces. Will in a very melancholy taking. After a little
discourse I to the Lords' House before they sat; and stood within it
a good while, while the Duke of York came to me and spoke to me a good
while about the new ship' at Woolwich. Afterwards I spoke with my Lord
Barkeley and my Lord Peterborough about it. And so staid without a good
while, and saw my Lady Peters, an impudent jade, soliciting all the
Lords on her behalf. And at last W. Joyce was called in; and by the
consequences, and what my Lord Peterborough told me, I find that he did
speak all he said to his disadvantage, and so was committed to the Black
Rod: which is very hard, he doing what he did by the advice of my Lord
Peters' own steward. But the Sergeant of the Black Rod did direct one of
his messengers to take him in custody, and so he was peaceably conducted
to the Swan with two Necks, in Tuttle Street, to a handsome dining-room;
and there was most civilly used, my uncle Fenner, and his brother
Anthony, and some other friends being with him. But who would have
thought that the fellow that I should have sworn could have spoken
before all the world should in this be so daunted, as not to know what
he said, and now to cry like a child. I protest, it is very strange to
observe. I left them providing for his stay there to-night and getting a
petition against tomorrow, and so away to Westminster Hall, and meeting
Mr. Coventry, he took me to his chamber, with Sir William Hickeman, a
member of their House, and a very civill gentleman. Here we dined very
plentifully, and thence to White Hall to the Duke's, where we all met,
and after some discourse of the condition of the Fleete, in order to a
Dutch warr, for that, I perceive, the Duke hath a mind it should
come to, we away to the office, where we sat, and I took care to rise
betimes, and so by water to Halfway House, talking all the way good
discourse with Mr. Wayth, and there found my wife, who was gone with her
mayd Besse to have a walk. But, Lord! how my jealous mind did make me
suspect that she might have some appointment to meet somebody. But I
found the poor souls coming away thence, so I took them back, and eat
and drank, and then home, and after at the office a while, I home to
supper and to bed. It was a sad sight, me thought, to-day to see my Lord
Peters coming out of the House fall out with his lady (from whom he is
parted) about this business; saying that she disgraced him. But she hath
been a handsome woman, and is, it seems, not only a lewd woman, but very
high-spirited.

5th. Up very betimes, and walked to my cozen Anthony Joyce's, and thence
with him to his brother Will, in Tuttle Street, where I find him pretty
cheery over [what] he was yesterday (like a coxcomb), his wife being
come to him, and having had his boy with him last night. Here I staid
an hour or two and wrote over a fresh petition, that which was drawn by
their solicitor not pleasing me, and thence to the Painted chamber, and
by and by away by coach to my Lord Peterborough's, and there delivered
the petition into his hand, which he promised most readily to deliver to
the House today. Thence back, and there spoke to several Lords, and
so did his solicitor (one that W. Joyce hath promised L5 to if he be
released). Lord Peterborough presented a petition to the House from
W. Joyce: and a great dispute, we hear, there was in the House for and
against it. At last it was carried that he should be bayled till the
House meets again after Easter, he giving bond for his appearance. This
was not so good as we hoped, but as good as we could well expect. Anon
comes the King and passed the Bill for repealing the Triennial Act, and
another about Writs of Errour. I crowded in and heard the King's speech
to them; but he speaks the worst that ever I heard man in my life worse
than if he read it all, and he had it in writing in his hand. Thence,
after the House was up, and I inquired what the order of the House was,
I to W. Joyce,' with his brother, and told them all. Here was Kate come,
and is a comely fat woman. I would not stay dinner, thinking to go home
to dinner, and did go by water as far as the bridge, but thinking that
they would take it kindly my being there, to be bayled for him if there
was need, I returned, but finding them gone out to look after it, only
Will and his wife and sister left and some friends that came to visit
him, I to Westminster Hall, and by and by by agreement to Mrs. Lane's
lodging, whither I sent for a lobster, and with Mr. Swayne and his wife
eat it, and argued before them mightily for Hawly, but all would not do,
although I made her angry by calling her old, and making her know what
herself is. Her body was out of temper for any dalliance, and so after
staying there 3 or 4 hours, but yet taking care to have my oath safe of
not staying a quarter of an hour together with her, I went to W. Joyce,
where I find the order come, and bayle (his father and brother) given;
and he paying his fees, which come to above L2, besides L5 he is to give
one man, and his charges of eating and drinking here, and 10s. a-day
as many days as he stands under bayle: which, I hope, will teach him
hereafter to hold his tongue better than he used to do. Thence with
Anth. Joyce's wife alone home talking of Will's folly, and having set
her down, home myself, where I find my wife dressed as if she had been
abroad, but I think she was not, but she answering me some way that
I did not like I pulled her by the nose, indeed to offend her, though
afterwards to appease her I denied it, but only it was done in haste.
The poor wretch took it mighty ill, and I believe besides wringing her
nose she did feel pain, and so cried a great while, but by and by I made
her friends, and so after supper to my office a while, and then home to
bed. This day great numbers of merchants came to a Grand Committee of
the House to bring in their claims against the Dutch. I pray God guide
the issue to our good!

6th. Up and to my office, whither by and by came John Noble, my father's
old servant, to speake with me. I smelling the business, took him home;
and there, all alone, he told me how he had been serviceable to my
brother Tom, in the business of his getting his servant, an ugly jade,
Margaret, with child. She was brought to bed in St. Sepulchre's parish
of two children; one is dead, the other is alive; her name Elizabeth,
and goes by the name of Taylor, daughter to John Taylor. It seems Tom
did a great while trust one Crawly with the business, who daily got
money of him; and at last, finding himself abused, he broke the matter
to J. Noble, upon a vowe of secresy. Tom's first plott was to go on
the other side the water and give a beggar woman something to take the
child. They did once go, but did nothing, J. Noble saying that seven
years hence the mother might come to demand the child and force him to
produce it, or to be suspected of murder. Then I think it was that they
consulted, and got one Cave, a poor pensioner in St. Bride's parish
to take it, giving him L5, he thereby promising to keepe it for ever
without more charge to them. The parish hereupon indite the man Cave
for bringing this child upon the parish, and by Sir Richard Browne he
is sent to the Counter. Cave thence writes to Tom to get him out. Tom
answers him in a letter of his owne hand, which J. Noble shewed me, but
not signed by him, wherein he speaks of freeing him and getting security
for him, but nothing as to the business of the child, or anything like
it: so that forasmuch as I could guess, there is nothing therein to my
brother's prejudice as to the main point, and therefore I did not labour
to tear or take away the paper. Cave being released, demands L5 more to
secure my brother for ever against the child; and he was forced to give
it him and took bond of Cave in L100, made at a scrivener's, one Hudson,
I think, in the Old Bayly, to secure John Taylor, and his assigns, &c.
(in consideration of L10 paid him), from all trouble, or charge of meat,
drink, clothes, and breeding of Elizabeth Taylor; and it seems, in
the doing of it, J. Noble was looked upon as the assignee of this John
Taylor. Noble says that he furnished Tom with this money, and is also
bound by another bond to pay him 20s. more this next Easter Monday; but
nothing for either sum appears under Tom's hand. I told him how I
am like to lose a great sum by his death, and would not pay any more
myself, but I would speake to my father about it against the afternoon.
So away he went, and I all the morning in my office busy, and at noon
home to dinner mightily oppressed with wind, and after dinner took coach
and to Paternoster Row, and there bought a pretty silke for a petticoate
for my wife, and thence set her down at the New Exchange, and I leaving
the coat at Unthanke's, went to White Hall, but the Councell meeting
at Worcester House I went thither, and there delivered to the Duke of
Albemarle a paper touching some Tangier business, and thence to the
'Change for my wife, and walked to my father's, who was packing up some
things for the country. I took him up and told him this business of Tom,
at which the poor wretch was much troubled, and desired me that I would
speak with J. Noble, and do what I could and thought fit in it without
concerning him in it. So I went to Noble, and saw the bond that Cave did
give and also Tom's letter that I mentioned above, and upon the whole I
think some shame may come, but that it will be hard from any thing I see
there to prove the child to be his. Thence to my father and told what I
had done, and how I had quieted Noble by telling him that, though we are
resolved to part with no more money out of our own purses, yet if he can
make it appear a true debt that it may be justifiable for us to pay it,
we will do our part to get it paid, and said that I would have it paid
before my own debt. So my father and I both a little satisfied, though
vexed to think what a rogue my brother was in all respects. I took my
wife by coach home, and to my office, where late with Sir W. Warren, and
so home to supper and to bed. I heard to-day that the Dutch have begun
with us by granting letters of marke against us; but I believe it not.

7th. Up and to my office, where busy, and by and by comes Sir W. Warren
and old Mr. Bond in order to the resolving me some questions about masts
and their proportions, but he could say little to me to my satisfaction,
and so I held him not long but parted. So to my office busy till noon
and then to the 'Change, where high talke of the Dutch's protest against
our Royall Company in Guinny, and their granting letters of marke
against us there, and every body expects a warr, but I hope it will not
yet be so, nor that this is true. Thence to dinner, where my wife got
me a pleasant French fricassee of veal for dinner, and thence to
the office, where vexed to see how Sir W. Batten ordered things this
afternoon (vide my office book, for about this time I have begun, my
notions and informations encreasing now greatly every day, to enter all
occurrences extraordinary in my office in a book by themselves), and so
in the evening after long discourse and eased my mind by discourse with
Sir W. Warren, I to my business late, and so home to supper and to bed.

8th. Up betimes and to the office, and anon, it begunn to be fair after
a great shower this morning, Sir W. Batten and I by water (calling his
son Castle by the way, between whom and I no notice at all of his letter
the other day to me) to Deptford, and after a turn in the yard, I went
with him to the Almes'-house to see the new building which he, with
some ambition, is building of there, during his being Master of Trinity
House; and a good worke it is, but to see how simply he answered
somebody concerning setting up the arms of the corporation upon the
door, that and any thing else he did not deny it, but said he would
leave that to the master that comes after him. There I left him and to
the King's yard again, and there made good inquiry into the business of
the poop lanterns, wherein I found occasion to correct myself mightily
for what I have done in the contract with the platerer, and am resolved,
though I know not how, to make them to alter it, though they signed it
last night, and so I took Stanes

     [Among the State Papers is a petition of Thomas Staine to the Navy
     Commissioners "for employment as plateworker in one or two
     dockyards.  Has incurred ill-will by discovering abuses in the great
     rates given by the king for several things in the said trade.  Begs
     the appointment, whereby it will be seen who does the work best and
     cheapest, otherwise he and all others will be discouraged from
     discovering abuses in future, with order thereon for a share of the
     work to be given to him"  ("Calendar," Domestic, 1663-64, p. 395)]

home with me by boat and discoursed it, and he will come to reason when
I can make him to understand it. No sooner landed but it fell a mighty
storm of rain and hail, so I put into a cane shop and bought one to walk
with, cost me 4s. 6d., all of one joint. So home to dinner, and had an
excellent Good Friday dinner of peas porridge and apple pye. So to the
office all the afternoon preparing a new book for my contracts, and this
afternoon come home the office globes done to my great content. In the
evening a little to visit Sir W. Pen, who hath a feeling this day or two
of his old pain. Then to walk in the garden with my wife, and so to my
office a while, and then home to the only Lenten supper I have had of
wiggs--[Buns or teacakes.]--and ale, and so to bed. This morning betimes
came to my office to me boatswain Smith of Woolwich, telling me a
notable piece of knavery of the officers of the yard and Mr. Gold in
behalf of a contract made for some old ropes by Mr. Wood, and I believe
I shall find Sir W. Batten of the plot (vide my office daybook).

     [These note-books referred to in the Diary are not known to exist
     now.]

9th. The last night, whether it was from cold I got to-day upon the
water I know not, or whether it was from my mind being over concerned
with Stanes's business of the platery of the navy, for my minds was
mighty troubled with the business all night long, I did wake about one
o'clock in the morning, a thing I most rarely do, and pissed a little
with great pain, continued sleepy, but in a high fever all night, fiery
hot, and in some pain. Towards morning I slept a little and waking
found myself better, but.... with some pain, and rose I confess with my
clothes sweating, and it was somewhat cold too, which I believe might do
me more hurt, for I continued cold and apt to shake all the morning, but
that some trouble with Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten kept me warm. At
noon home to dinner upon tripes, and so though not well abroad with my
wife by coach to her Tailor's and the New Exchange, and thence to my
father's and spoke one word with him, and thence home, where I found
myself sick in my stomach and vomited, which I do not use to do. Then
I drank a glass or two of Hypocras, and to the office to dispatch
some business, necessary, and so home and to bed, and by the help of
Mithrydate slept very well.

10th (Lord's day). Lay long in bed, and then up and my wife dressed
herself, it being Easter day, but I not being so well as to go out, she,
though much against her will, staid at home with me; for she had put
on her new best gowns, which indeed is very fine now with the lace; and
this morning her taylor brought home her other new laced silks gowns
with a smaller lace, and new petticoats, I bought the other day both
very pretty. We spent the day in pleasant talks and company one with
another, reading in Dr. Fuller's book what he says of the family of the
Cliffords and Kingsmills, and at night being myself better than I was
by taking a glyster, which did carry away a great deal of wind, I after
supper at night went to bed and slept well.

11th. Lay long talking with my wife, then up and to my chamber preparing
papers against my father comes to lie here for discourse about country
business. Dined well with my wife at home, being myself not yet thorough
well, making water with some pain, but better than I was, and all my
fear of an ague gone away. In the afternoon my father came to see us,
and he gone I up to my morning's work again, and so in the evening a
little to the office and to see Sir W. Batten, who is ill again, and so
home to supper and to bed.

12th. Up, and after my wife had dressed herself very fine in her new
laced gown, and very handsome indeed, W. Howe also coming to see us, I
carried her by coach to my uncle Wight's and set her down there, and W.
Howe and I to the Coffee-house, where we sat talking about getting of
him some place under my Lord of advantage if he should go to sea, and I
would be glad to get him secretary and to out Creed if I can, for he
is a crafty and false rogue. Thence a little to the 'Change, and thence
took him to my uncle Wight's, where dined my father, poor melancholy
man, that used to be as full of life as anybody, and also my aunt's
brother, Mr. Sutton, a merchant in Flanders, a very sober, fine man, and
Mr. Cole and his lady; but, Lord! how I used to adore that man's talke,
and now methinks he is but an ordinary man, his son a pretty boy indeed,
but his nose unhappily awry. Other good company and an indifferent,
and but indifferent dinner for so much company, and after dinner got
a coach, very dear, it being Easter time and very foul weather, to my
Lord's, and there visited my Lady, and leaving my wife there I and W.
Howe to Mr. Pagett's, and there heard some musique not very good, but
only one Dr. Walgrave, an Englishman bred at Rome, who plays the best
upon the lute that I ever heard man. Here I also met Mr. Hill

     [Thomas Hill, a man whose taste for music caused him to be a very
     acceptable companion to Pepys.  In January, 1664-65, he became
     assistant to the secretary of the Prize Office.]

the little merchant, and after all was done we sung. I did well enough a
Psalm or two of Lawes; he I perceive has good skill and sings well, and
a friend of his sings a good base. Thence late walked with them two as
far as my Lord's, thinking to take up my wife and carry them home,
but there being no coach to be got away they went, and I staid a great
while, it being very late, about 10 o'clock, before a coach could be
got. I found my Lord and ladies and my wife at supper. My Lord seems
very kind. But I am apt to think still the worst, and that it is only in
show, my wife and Lady being there. So home, and find my father come to
lie at our house; and so supped, and saw him, poor man, to bed, my heart
never being fuller of love to him, nor admiration of his prudence and
pains heretofore in the world than now, to see how Tom hath carried
himself in his trade; and how the poor man hath his thoughts going to
provide for his younger children and my mother. But I hope they shall
never want. So myself and wife to bed.

13th. Though late, past 12, before we went to bed, yet I heard my poor
father up, and so I rang up my people, and I rose and got something to
eat and drink for him, and so abroad, it being a mighty foul day, by
coach, setting my father down in Fleet Streete and I to St. James's,
where I found Mr. Coventry (the Duke being now come thither for the
summer) with a goldsmith, sorting out his old plate to change for new;
but, Lord! what a deale he hath! I staid and had two or three hours
discourse with him, talking about the disorders of our office, and I
largely to tell him how things are carried by Sir W. Batten and Sir J.
Minnes to my great grief. He seems much concerned also, and for all the
King's matters that are done after the same rate every where else, and
even the Duke's household matters too, generally with corruption, but
most indeed with neglect and indifferency. I spoke very loud and clear
to him my thoughts of Sir J. Minnes and the other, and trust him with
the using of them. Then to talk of our business with the Dutch; he tells
me fully that he believes it will not come to a warr; for first, he
showed me a letter from Sir George Downing, his own hand, where he
assures him that the Dutch themselves do not desire, but above all
things fear it, and that they neither have given letters of marke
against our shipps in Guinny, nor do De Ruyter

     [Michael De Ruyter, the Dutch admiral, was born 1607.  He served
     under Tromp in the war against England in 1653, and was Lieutenant
     Admiral General of Holland in 1665.  He died April 26th, 1676, of
     wounds received in a battle with the French off Syracuse.  Among the
     State Papers is a news letter (dated July 14th, 1664) containing
     information as to the views of the Dutch respecting a war with
     England.  "They are preparing many ships, and raising 6,000 men, and
     have no doubt of conquering by sea."  "A wise man says the States
     know how to master England by sending moneys into Scotland for them
     to rebel, and also to the discontented in England, so as to place
     the King in the same straits as his father was, and bring him to
     agree with Holland" ("Calendar," 1663-64, p. 642).]

stay at home with his fleet with an eye to any such thing, but for want
of a wind, and is now come out and is going to the Streights. He tells
me also that the most he expects is that upon the merchants' complaints,
the Parliament will represent them to the King, desiring his securing of
his subjects against them, and though perhaps they may not directly
see fit, yet even this will be enough to let the Dutch know that the
Parliament do not oppose the King, and by that means take away their
hopes, which was that the King of England could not get money or do
anything towards a warr with them, and so thought themselves free from
making any restitution, which by this they will be deceived in. He
tells me also that the Dutch states are in no good condition themselves,
differing one with another, and that for certain none but the states of
Holland and Zealand will contribute towards a warr, the others reckoning
themselves, being inland, not concerned in the profits of warr or peace.
But it is pretty to see what he says, that those here that are forward
for a warr at Court, they are reported in the world to be only designers
of getting money into the King's hands, they that elsewhere are for
it have a design to trouble the kingdom and to give the Fanatiques an
opportunity of doing hurt, and lastly those that are against it (as
he himself for one is very cold therein) are said to be bribed by the
Dutch. After all this discourse he carried me in his coach, it raining
still, to, Charing Cross, and there put me into another, and I calling
my father and brother carried them to my house to dinner, my wife
keeping bed all day..... All the afternoon at the office with W. Boddam
looking over his particulars about the Chest of Chatham, which shows
enough what a knave Commissioner Pett hath been all along, and how Sir
W. Batten hath gone on in getting good allowance to himself and others
out of the poors' money. Time will show all. So in the evening to see
Sir W. Pen, and then home to my father to keep him company, he being to
go out of town, and up late with him and my brother John till past 12
at night to make up papers of Tom's accounts fit to leave with my cozen
Scott. At last we did make an end of them, and so after supper all to
bed.

14th. Up betimes, and after my father's eating something, I walked out
with him as far as Milk Streete, he turning down to Cripplegate to take
coach; and at the end of the streete I took leave, being much afeard I
shall not see him here any more, he do decay so much every day, and so
I walked on, there being never a coach to be had till I came to Charing
Cross, and there Col. Froud took me up and carried me to St. James's,
where with Mr. Coventry and Povy, &c., about my Lord Peterborough's
accounts, but, Lord! to see still what a puppy that Povy is with all his
show is very strange. Thence to Whitehall and W. C[oventry] and I and
Sir W. Rider resolved upon a day to meet and make an end of all the
business. Thence walked with Creed to the Coffee-house in Covent Garden,
where no company, but he told me many fine experiments at Gresham
College; and some demonstration that the heat and cold of the weather
do rarify and condense the very body of glasse, as in a bolt head' with
cold water in it put into hot water, shall first by rarifying the glasse
make the water sink, and then when the heat comes to the water makes
that rise again, and then put into cold water makes the water by
condensing the glass to rise, and then when the cold comes to the water
makes it sink, which is very pretty and true, he saw it tried. Thence by
coach home, and dined above with my wife by her bedside, she keeping her
bed..... So to the office, where a great conflict with Wood and Castle
about their New England masts? So in the evening my mind a little vexed,
but yet without reason, for I shall prevail, I hope, for the King's
profit, and so home to supper and to bed.

15th. Up and all the morning with Captain Taylor at my house talking
about things of the Navy, and among other things I showed him my letters
to Mr. Coventry, wherein he acknowledges that nobody to this day
did ever understand so much as I have done, and I believe him, for I
perceive he did very much listen to every article as things new to him,
and is contented to abide by my opinion therein in his great contest
with us about his and Mr. Wood's masts. At noon to the 'Change, where I
met with Mr. Hill, the little merchant, with whom, I perceive, I
shall contract a musical acquaintance; but I will make it as little
troublesome as I can. Home and dined, and then with my wife by coach
to the Duke's house, and there saw "The German Princess" acted, by the
woman herself; but never was any thing so well done in earnest, worse
performed in jest upon the stage; and indeed the whole play, abating the
drollery of him that acts her husband, is very simple, unless here and
there a witty sprinkle or two. We met and sat by Dr. Clerke. Thence
homewards, calling at Madam Turner's, and thence set my wife down at
my aunt Wight's and I to my office till late, and then at to at night
fetched her home, and so again to my office a little, and then to supper
and to bed.

16th. Up and to the office, where all the morning upon the dispute of
Mr. Wood's masts, and at noon with Mr. Coventry to the African House;
and after a good and pleasant dinner, up with him, Sir W. Rider, the
simple Povy, of all the most ridiculous foole that ever I knew to
attend to business, and Creed and Vernatty, about my Lord Peterborough's
accounts; but the more we look into them, the more we see of them that
makes dispute, which made us break off, and so I home, and there found
my wife and Besse gone over the water to Half-way house, and after them,
thinking to have gone to Woolwich, but it was too late, so eat a cake
and home, and thence by coach to have spoke with Tom Trice about a
letter I met with this afternoon from my cozen Scott, wherein he seems
to deny proceeding as my father's attorney in administering for him
in my brother Tom's estate, but I find him gone out of town, and so
returned vexed home and to the office, where late writing a letter to
him, and so home and to bed.

17th (Lord's day). Up, and I put on my best cloth black suit and my
velvet cloake, and with my wife in her best laced suit to church, where
we have not been these nine or ten weeks. The truth is, my jealousy hath
hindered it, for fear she should see Pembleton. He was here to-day, but
I think sat so as he could not see her, which did please me, God help
me! mightily, though I know well enough that in reason this is nothing
but my ridiculous folly. Home to dinner, and in the afternoon, after
long consulting whether to go to Woolwich or no to see Mr. Falconer, but
indeed to prevent my wife going to church, I did however go to church
with her, where a young simple fellow did preach: I slept soundly all
the sermon, and thence to Sir W. Pen's, my wife and I, there she talking
with him and his daughter, and thence with my wife walked to my uncle
Wight's and there supped, where very merry, but I vexed to see what
charges the vanity of my aunt puts her husband to among her friends and
nothing at all among ours. Home and to bed. Our parson, Mr. Mills, his
owne mistake in reading of the service was very remarkable, that instead
of saying, "We beseech thee to preserve to our use the kindly fruits
of the earth," he cries, "Preserve to our use our gracious Queen
Katherine."

18th. Up and by coach to Westminster, and there solicited W. Joyce's
business again; and did speake to the Duke of Yorke about it, who did
understand it very well. I afterwards did without the House fall in
company with my Lady Peters, and endeavoured to mollify her; but she
told me she would not, to redeem her from hell, do any thing to release
him; but would be revenged while she lived, if she lived the age of
Methusalem. I made many friends, and so did others. At last it was
ordered by the Lords that it should be referred to the Committee of
Privileges to consider. So I, after discoursing with the Joyces, away by
coach to the 'Change; and there, among other things, do hear that a Jew
hath put in a policy of four per cent. to any man, to insure him against
a Dutch warr for four months; I could find in my heart to take him at
this offer, but however will advise first, and to that end took coach
to St. James's, but Mr. Coventry was gone forth, and I thence to
Westminster Hall, where Mrs. Lane was gone forth, and so I missed of
my intent to be with her this afternoon, and therefore meeting Mr.
Blagrave, went home with him, and there he and his kinswoman sang, but
I was not pleased with it, they singing methought very ill, or else I
am grown worse to please than heretofore. Thence to the Hall again, and
after meeting with several persons, and talking there, I to Mrs. Hunt's
(where I knew my wife and my aunt Wight were about business), and they
being gone to walk in the parke I went after them with Mrs. Hunt, who
staid at home for me, and finding them did by coach, which I had agreed
to wait for me, go with them all and Mrs. Hunt and a kinswoman of
theirs, Mrs. Steward, to Hide Parke, where I have not been since last
year; where I saw the King with his periwigg, but not altered at all;
and my Lady Castlemayne in a coach by herself, in yellow satin and a
pinner on; and many brave persons. And myself being in a hackney and
full of people, was ashamed to be seen by the world, many of them
knowing me. Thence in the evening home, setting my aunt at home, and
thence we sent for a joynt of meat to supper, and thence to the office
at 11 o'clock at night, and so home to bed.

19th. Up and to St. James's, where long with Mr. Coventry, Povy, &c., in
their Tangier accounts, but such the folly of that coxcomb Povy that we
could do little in it, and so parted for the time, and I to walk with
Creed and Vernaty in the Physique Garden in St. James's Parke; where I
first saw orange-trees, and other fine trees. So to Westminster Hall,
and thence by water to the Temple, and so walked to the 'Change, and
there find the 'Change full of news from Guinny, some say the Dutch have
sunk our ships and taken our fort, and others say we have done the same
to them. But I find by our merchants that something is done, but is yet
a secret among them. So home to dinner, and then to the office, and
at night with Captain Tayler consulting how to get a little money by
letting him the Elias to fetch masts from New England. So home to supper
and to bed.

20th. Up and by coach to Westminster, and there solicited W. Joyce's
business all the morning, and meeting in the Hall with Mr. Coventry, he
told me how the Committee for Trade have received now all the complaints
of the merchants against the Dutch, and were resolved to report very
highly the wrongs they have done us (when, God knows! it is only our
owne negligence and laziness that hath done us the wrong) and this to be
made to the House to-morrow. I went also out of the Hall with Mrs. Lane
to the Swan at Mrs. Herbert's in the Palace Yard to try a couple of
bands, and did (though I had a mind to be playing the fool with her)
purposely stay but a little while, and kept the door open, and called
the master and mistress of the house one after another to drink and talk
with me, and showed them both my old and new bands. So that as I did
nothing so they are able to bear witness that I had no opportunity there
to do anything. Thence by coach with Sir W. Pen home, calling at the
Temple for Lawes's Psalms, which I did not so much (by being against my
oath) buy as only lay down money till others be bound better for me, and
by that time I hope to get money of the Treasurer of the Navy by bills,
which, according to my oath, shall make me able to do it. At home dined,
and all the afternoon at a Committee of the Chest, and at night comes
my aunt and uncle Wight and Nan Ferrers and supped merrily with me,
my uncle coming in an hour after them almost foxed. Great pleasure by
discourse with them, and so, they gone, late to bed.

21st. Up pretty betimes and to my office, and thither came by and by Mr.
Vernaty and staid two hours with me, but Mr. Gauden did not come, and so
he went away to meet again anon. Then comes Mr. Creed, and, after some
discourse, he and I and my wife by coach to Westminster (leaving her at
Unthanke's, her tailor's) Hall, and there at the Lords' House heard that
it is ordered, that, upon submission upon the knee both to the House and
my Lady Peters, W. Joyce shall be released. I forthwith made him submit,
and aske pardon upon his knees; which he did before several Lords. But
my Lady would not hear it; but swore she would post the Lords, that the
world might know what pitifull Lords the King hath; and that revenge was
sweeter to her than milk; and that she would never be satisfied unless
he stood in a pillory, and demand pardon there. But I perceive the Lords
are ashamed of her, and so I away calling with my wife at a place or two
to inquire after a couple of mayds recommended to us, but we found
both of them bad. So set my wife at my uncle Wight's and I home, and
presently to the 'Change, where I did some business, and thence to my
uncle's and there dined very well, and so to the office, we sat all the
afternoon, but no sooner sat but news comes my Lady Sandwich was come to
see us, so I went out, and running up (her friend however before me) I
perceive by my dear Lady blushing that in my dining-room she was doing
something upon the pott, which I also was ashamed of, and so fell to
some discourse, but without pleasure through very pity to my Lady. She
tells me, and I find true since, that the House this day have voted that
the King be desired to demand right for the wrong done us by the Dutch,
and that they will stand by him with their lives fortunes: which is a
very high vote, and more than I expected. What the issue will be, God
knows! My Lady, my wife not being at home, did not stay, but, poor, good
woman, went away, I being mightily taken with her dear visitt, and so to
the office, where all the afternoon till late, and so to my office, and
then to supper and to bed, thinking to rise betimes tomorrow.

22nd. Having directed it last night, I was called up this morning before
four o'clock. It was full light enough to dress myself, and so by water
against tide, it being a little coole, to Greenwich; and thence, only
that it was somewhat foggy till the sun got to some height, walked with
great pleasure to Woolwich, in my way staying several times to listen
to the nightingales. I did much business both at the Ropeyarde and the
other, and on floate I discovered a plain cheat which in time I shall
publish of Mr. Ackworth's. Thence, having visited Mr. Falconer also,
who lies still sick, but hopes to be better, I walked to Greenwich, Mr.
Deane with me. Much good discourse, and I think him a very just man,
only a little conceited, but yet very able in his way, and so he by
water also with me also to towne. I home, and immediately dressing
myself, by coach with my wife to my Lord Sandwich's, but they having
dined we would not 'light but went to Mrs. Turner's, and there got
something to eat, and thence after reading part of a good play, Mrs.
The., my wife and I, in their coach to Hide Parke, where great plenty of
gallants, and pleasant it was, only for the dust. Here I saw Mrs. Bendy,
my Lady Spillman's faire daughter that was, who continues yet very
handsome. Many others I saw with great content, and so back again to
Mrs. Turner's, and then took a coach and home. I did also carry them
into St. James's Park and shewed them the garden. To my office awhile
while supper was making ready, and so home to supper and to bed.

23rd (Coronation day). Up, and after doing something at my office, and,
it being a holiday, no sitting likely to be, I down by water to Sir
W. Warren's, who hath been ill, and there talked long with him good
discourse, especially about Sir W. Batten's knavery and his son Castle's
ill language of me behind my back, saying that I favour my fellow
traytours, but I shall be even with him. So home and to the 'Change,
where I met with Mr. Coventry, who himself is now full of talke of a
Dutch warr; for it seems the Lords have concurred in the Commons'
vote about it; and so the next week it will be presented to the King,
insomuch that he do desire we would look about to see what stores we
lack, and buy what we can. Home to dinner, where I and my wife much
troubled about my money that is in my Lord Sandwich's hand, for fear of
his going to sea and be killed; but I will get what of it out I can.
All the afternoon, not being well, at my office, and there doing much
business, my thoughts still running upon a warr and my money. At night
home to supper and to bed.

24th (Lord's day). Up, and all the morning in my chamber setting some
of my private papers in order, for I perceive that now publique business
takes up so much of my time that I must get time a-Sundays or a-nights
to look after my owne matters. Dined and spent all the afternoon talking
with my wife, at night a little to the office, and so home to supper and
to bed.

25th. Up, and with Sir W. Pen by coach to St. James's and there up to
the Duke, and after he was ready to his closet, where most of our talke
about a Dutch warr, and discoursing of things indeed now for it. The
Duke, which gives me great good hopes, do talk of setting up a good
discipline in the fleete. In the Duke's chamber there is a bird, given
him by Mr. Pierce, the surgeon, comes from the East Indys, black the
greatest part, with the finest collar of white about the neck; but talks
many things and neyes like the horse, and other things, the best almost
that ever I heard bird in my life. Thence down with Mr. Coventry and Sir
W. Rider, who was there (going along with us from the East Indya house
to-day) to discourse of my Lord Peterborough's accounts, and then walked
over the Parke, and in Mr. Cutler's coach with him and Rider as far
as the Strand, and thence I walked to my Lord Sandwich's, where by
agreement I met my wife, and there dined with the young ladies; my Lady,
being not well, kept her chamber. Much simple discourse at table among
the young ladies. After dinner walked in the garden, talking, with Mr.
Moore about my Lord's business. He told me my Lord runs in debt every
day more and more, and takes little care how to come out of it. He
counted to me how my Lord pays use now for above L9000, which is a sad
thing, especially considering the probability of his going to sea, in
great danger of his life, and his children, many of them, to provide
for. Thence, the young ladies going out to visit, I took my wife by
coach out through the city, discoursing how to spend the afternoon; and
conquered, with much ado, a desire of going to a play; but took her out
at White Chapel, and to Bednal Green; so to Hackney, where I have
not been many a year, since a little child I boarded there. Thence to
Kingsland, by my nurse's house, Goody Lawrence, where my brother Tom and
I was kept when young. Then to Newington Green, and saw the outside of
Mrs. Herbert's house, where she lived, and my Aunt Ellen with her;
but, Lord! how in every point I find myself to over-value things when
a child. Thence to Islington, and so to St. John's to the Red Bull,
and there: saw the latter part of a rude prize fought, but with good
pleasure enough; and thence back to Islington, and at the King's Head,
where Pitts lived, we 'light and eat and drunk for remembrance of the
old house sake, and so through Kingsland again, and so to Bishopsgate,
and so home with great pleasure. The country mighty pleasant, and we
with great content home, and after supper to bed, only a little troubled
at the young ladies leaving my wife so to-day, and from some passages
fearing my Lady might be offended. But I hope the best.

26th. Up, and to my Lord Sandwich's, and coming a little too early, I
went and saw W. Joyce, and by and by comes in Anthony, they both owning
a great deal of kindness received from me in their late business, and
indeed I did what I could, and yet less I could not do. It has cost the
poor man above L40; besides, he is likely to lose his debt. Thence to my
Lord's, and by and by he comes down, and with him (Creed with us) I rode
in his coach to St. James's, talking about W. Joyce's business mighty
merry, and my Lady Peters, he says, is a drunken jade, he himself having
seen her drunk in the lobby of their House. I went up with him to the
Duke, where methought the Duke did not shew him any so great fondness as
he was wont; and methought my Lord was not pleased that I should see the
Duke made no more of him, not that I know any thing of any unkindnesse,
but I think verily he is not as he was with him in his esteem. By and
by the Duke went out and we with him through the Parke, and there I left
him going into White Hall, and Creed and I walked round the Parke,
a pleasant walk, observing the birds, which is very pleasant; and so
walked to the New Exchange, and there had a most delicate dish of curds
and creame, and discourse with the good woman of the house, a discreet
well-bred woman, and a place with great delight I shall make it now and
then to go thither. Thence up, and after a turn or two in the 'Change,
home to the Old Exchange by coach, where great newes and true, I saw by
written letters, of strange fires seen at Amsterdam in the ayre, and not
only there, but in other places thereabout. The talke of a Dutch warr
is not so hot, but yet I fear it will come to it at last. So home and
to the office, where we sat late. My wife gone this afternoon to
the buriall of my she-cozen Scott, a good woman; and it is a sad
consideration how the Pepys's decay, and nobody almost that I know in a
present way of encreasing them. At night late at my office, and so home
to my wife to supper and to bed.

27th. Up, and all the morning very busy with multitude of clients, till
my head began to be overloaded. Towards noon I took coach and to the
Parliament house door, and there staid the rising of the House, and with
Sir G. Carteret and Mr. Coventry discoursed of some tarr that I have
been endeavouring to buy, for the market begins apace to rise upon us,
and I would be glad first to serve the King well, and next if I could I
find myself now begin to cast how to get a penny myself. Home by coach
with Alderman Backewell in his coach, whose opinion is that the Dutch
will not give over the business without putting us to some trouble to
set out a fleete; and then, if they see we go on well, will seek to
salve up the matter. Upon the 'Change busy. Thence home to dinner, and
thence to the office till my head was ready to burst with business, and
so with my wife by coach, I sent her to my Lady Sandwich and myself to
my cozen Roger Pepys's chamber, and there he did advise me about our
Exchequer business, and also about my brother John, he is put by my
father upon interceding for him, but I will not yet seem the least to
pardon him nor can I in my heart. However, he and I did talk how to get
him a mandamus for a fellowship, which I will endeavour. Thence to my
Lady's, and in my way met Mr. Sanchy, of Cambridge, whom I have not met
a great while. He seems a simple fellow, and tells me their master, Dr.
Rainbow, is newly made Bishop of Carlisle. To my Lady's, and she not
being well did not see her, but straight home with my wife, and late to
my office, concluding in the business of Wood's masts, which I have
now done and I believe taken more pains in it than ever any Principall
officer in this world ever did in any thing to no profit to this day.
So, weary, sleepy, and hungry, home and to bed. This day the Houses
attended the King, and delivered their votes to him: upon the business
of the Dutch; and he thanks them, and promises an answer in writing.

28th. Up and close at my office all the morning. To the 'Change busy
at noon, and so home to dinner, and then in the afternoon at the office
till night, and so late home quite tired with business, and without joy
in myself otherwise than that I am by God's grace enabled to go through
it and one day, hope to have benefit by it. So home to supper and to
bed.

29th. Up betimes, and with Sir W. Rider and Cutler to White Hall. Rider
and I to St. James's, and there with Mr. Coventry did proceed strictly
upon some fooleries of Mr. Povy's in my Lord Peterborough's accounts,
which will touch him home, and I am glad of it, for he is the most
troublesome impertinent man that ever I met with. Thence to the 'Change,
and there, after some business, home to dinner, where Luellin and Mount
came to me and dined, and after dinner my wife and I by coach to see my
Lady Sandwich, where we find all the children and my Lord removed, and
the house so melancholy that I thought my Lady had been dead, knowing
that she was not well; but it seems she hath the meazles, and I fear the
small pox, poor lady. It grieves me mightily; for it will be a sad
houre to the family should she miscarry. Thence straight home and to the
office, and in the evening comes Mr. Hill the merchant and another with
him that sings well, and we sung some things, and good musique it seemed
to me, only my mind too full of business to have much pleasure in it.
But I will have more of it. They gone, and I having paid Mr. Moxon for
the work he has done for the office upon the King's globes, I to my
office, where very late busy upon Captain Tayler's bills for his masts,
which I think will never off my hand. Home to supper and to bed.

30th. Up and all the morning at the office. At noon to the 'Change,
where, after business done, Sir W. Rider and Cutler took me to the Old
James and there did give me a good dish of mackerell, the first I have
seen this year, very good, and good discourse. After dinner we fell to
business about their contract for tarr, in which and in another business
of Sir W. Rider's, canvas, wherein I got him to contract with me, I held
them to some terms against their wills, to the King's advantage, which I
believe they will take notice of to my credit. Thence home, and by water
by a gally down to Woolwich, and there a good while with Mr. Pett upon
the new ship discoursing and learning of him. Thence with Mr. Deane
to see Mr. Falconer, and there find him in a way to be well. So to the
water (after much discourse with great content with Mr. Deane) and home
late, and so to the office, wrote to, my father among other things my
continued displeasure against my brother John, so that I will give him
nothing more out of my own purse, which will trouble the poor man, but
however it is fit that I should take notice of my brother's ill carriage
to me. Then home and till 12 at night about my month's accounts, wherein
I have just kept within compass, this having been a spending month. So
my people being all abed I put myself to bed very sleepy. All the newes
now is what will become of the Dutch business, whether warr or peace.
We all seem to desire it, as thinking ourselves to have advantages at
present over them; for my part I dread it. The Parliament promises to
assist the King with lives and fortunes, and he receives it with thanks
and promises to demand satisfaction of the Dutch. My poor Lady Sandwich
is fallen sick three days since of the meazles. My Lord Digby's business
is hushed up, and nothing made of it; he is gone, and the discourse
quite ended. Never more quiet in my family all the days of my life than
now, there being only my wife and I and Besse and the little girl Susan,
the best wenches to our content that we can ever expect.




MAY 1664

May 1st (Lord's day). Lay long in bed. Went not to church, but staid at
home to examine my last night's accounts, which I find right, and that
I am L908 creditor in the world, the same I was last month. Dined, and
after dinner down by water with my wife and Besse with great pleasure
as low as Greenwich and so back, playing as it were leisurely upon the
water to Deptford, where I landed and sent my wife up higher to land
below Half-way house. I to the King's yard and there spoke about several
businesses with the officers, and so with Mr. Wayth consulting about
canvas, to Half-way house where my wife was, and after eating there we
broke and walked home before quite dark. So to supper, prayers, and to
bed.

2nd. Lay pretty long in bed. So up and by water to St. James's, and
there attended the Duke with Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes, and having
done our work with him walked to Westminster Hall, and after walking
there and talking of business met Mr. Rawlinson and by coach to the
'Change, where I did some business, and home to dinner, and presently by
coach to the King's Play-house to see "The Labyrinth," but, coming too
soon, walked to my Lord's to hear how my Lady do, who is pretty well;
at least past all fear. There by Captain Ferrers meeting with an
opportunity of my Lord's coach, to carry us to the Parke anon, we
directed it to come to the play-house door; and so we walked, my wife
and I and Madamoiselle. I paid for her going in, and there saw "The
Labyrinth," the poorest play, methinks, that ever I saw, there being
nothing in it but the odd accidents that fell out, by a lady's being
bred up in man's apparel, and a man in a woman's. Here was Mrs. Stewart,
who is indeed very pretty, but not like my Lady Castlemayne, for all
that. Thence in the coach to the Parke, where no pleasure; there being
much dust, little company, and one of our horses almost spoiled
by falling down, and getting his leg over the pole; but all mended
presently, and after riding up and down, home. Set Madamoiselle at home;
and we home, and to my office, whither comes Mr. Bland, and pays me the
debt he acknowledged he owed me for my service in his business of
the Tangier Merchant, twenty pieces of new gold, a pleasant sight. It
cheered my heart; and he being gone, I home to supper, and shewed them
my wife; and she, poor wretch, would fain have kept them to look on,
without any other design but a simple love to them; but I thought it not
convenient, and so took them into my own hand. So, after supper, to bed.

3rd. Up, and being ready, went by agreement to Mr. Bland's and there
drank my morning draft in good chocollatte, and slabbering my band sent
home for another, and so he and I by water to White Hall, and walked to
St. James's, where met Creed and Vernatty, and by and by Sir W. Rider,
and so to Mr. Coventry's chamber, and there upon my Lord Peterborough's
accounts, where I endeavoured to shew the folly and punish it as much as
I could of Mr. Povy; for, of all the men in the world, I never knew any
man of his degree so great a coxcomb in such imployments. I see I have
lost him forever, but I value it not; for he is a coxcomb, and, I doubt,
not over honest, by some things which I see; and yet, for all his folly,
he hath the good lucke, now and then, to speak his follies in as
good words, and with as good a show, as if it were reason, and to the
purpose, which is really one of the wonders of my life. Thence walked to
Westminster Hall; and there, in the Lords' House, did in a great crowd,
from ten o'clock till almost three, hear the cause of Mr. Roberts, my
Lord Privy Seal's son, against Win, who by false ways did get the
father of Mr. Roberts's wife (Mr. Bodvill) to give him the estate and
disinherit his daughter. The cause was managed for my Lord Privy Seal by
Finch the Solicitor [General]; but I do really think that he is truly a
man of as great eloquence as ever I heard, or ever hope to hear in all
my life. Thence, after long staying to speak with my Lord Sandwich, at
last he coming out to me and speaking with me about business of my Lord
Peterborough, I by coach home to the office, where all the afternoon,
only stept home to eat one bit and to the office again, having eaten
nothing before to-day. My wife abroad with my aunt Wight and Norbury. I
in the evening to my uncle Wight's, and not finding them come home, they
being gone to the Parke and the Mulberry garden, I went to the 'Change,
and there meeting with Mr. Hempson, whom Sir W. Batten has lately turned
out of his place, merely because of his coming to me when he came to
town before he went to him, and there he told me many rogueries of Sir
W. Batten, how he knows and is able to prove that Captain Cox of Chatham
did give him L10 in gold to get him to certify for him at the King's
coming in, and that Tom Newborne did make [the] poor men give him L3 to
get Sir W. Batten to cause them to be entered in the yard, and that Sir
W. Batten had oftentimes said: "by God, Tom, you shall get something and
I will have some on't." His present clerk that is come in Norman's' room
has given him something for his place; that they live high and (as
Sir Francis Clerk's lady told his wife) do lack money as well as other
people, and have bribes of a piece of sattin and cabinetts and other
things from people that deal with him, and that hardly any body goes to
see or hath anything done by Sir W. Batten but it comes with a bribe,
and that this is publickly true that his wife was a whore, and that
he had libells flung within his doors for a cuckold as soon as he was
married; that he received L100 in money and in other things to the value
of L50 more of Hempson, and that he intends to give him back but L50;
that he hath abused the Chest and hath now some L1000 by him of it.
I met also upon the 'Change with Mr. Cutler, and he told me how for
certain Lawson hath proclaimed warr again with Argier, though they had
at his first coming given back the ships which they had taken, and all
their men; though they refused afterwards to make him restitution for
the goods which they had taken out of them. Thence to my uncle Wight's,
and he not being at home I went with Mr. Norbury near hand to the
Fleece, a mum house in Leadenhall, and there drunk mum and by and by
broke up, it being about 11 o'clock at night, and so leaving them also
at home, went home myself and to bed.

4th. Up, and my new Taylor, Langford, comes and takes measure of me
for a new black cloth suit and cloake, and I think he will prove a
very carefull fellow and will please me well. Thence to attend my Lord
Peterborough in bed and give him an account of yesterday's proceeding
with Povy. I perceive I labour in a business will bring me little
pleasure; but no matter, I shall do the King some service. To my Lord's
lodgings, where during my Lady's sickness he is, there spoke with him
about the same business. Back and by water to my cozen Scott's. There
condoled with him the loss of my cozen, his wife, and talked about his
matters, as atturney to my father, in his administering to my brother
Tom. He tells me we are like to receive some shame about the business
of his bastarde with Jack Noble; but no matter, so it cost us no money.
Thence to the Coffee-house and to the 'Change a while. News uncertain
how the Dutch proceed. Some say for, some against a war. The plague
increases at Amsterdam. So home to dinner, and after dinner to my
office, where very late, till my eyes (which begin to fail me nowadays
by candlelight) begin to trouble me. Only in the afternoon comes Mr.
Peter Honiwood to see me and gives me 20s., his and his friends' pence
for my brother John, which, God forgive my pride, methinks I think
myself too high to take of him; but it is an ungratefull pitch of pride
in me, which God forgive. Home at night to supper and to bed.

5th. Up betimes to my office, busy, and so abroad to change some plate
for my father to send to-day by the carrier to Brampton, but I observe
and do fear it may be to my wrong that I change spoons of my uncle
Robert's into new and set a P upon them that thereby I cannot claim them
hereafter, as it was my brother Tom's practice. However, the matter of
this is not great, and so I did it. So to the 'Change, and meeting Sir
W. Warren, with him to a taverne, and there talked, as we used to do, of
the evils the King suffers in our ordering of business in the Navy, as
Sir W. Batten now forces us by his knavery. So home to dinner, and to
the office, where all the afternoon, and thence betimes home, my eyes
beginning every day to grow less and less able to bear with long reading
or writing, though it be by daylight; which I never observed till now.
So home to my wife, and after supper to bed.

6th. This morning up and to my office, where Sympson my joyner came
to work upon altering my closet, which I alter by setting the door in
another place, and several other things to my great content. Busy at it
all day, only in the afternoon home, and there, my books at the office
being out of order, wrote letters and other businesses. So at night with
my head full of the business of my closet home to bed, and strange it is
to think how building do fill my mind and put out all other things out
of my thoughts.

7th. Betimes at my office with the joyners, and giving order for other
things about it. By and by we sat all the morning. At noon to dinner,
and after dinner comes Deane of Woolwich, and I spent, as I had
appointed, all the afternoon with him about instructions which he
gives me to understand the building of a ship, and I think I shall soon
understand it. In the evening a little to my office to see how the work
goes forward there, and then home and spent the evening also with Mr.
Deane, and had a good supper, and then to bed, he lying at my house.

8th (Lord's day). This day my new tailor, Mr. Langford, brought me home
a new black cloth suit and cloake lined with silk moyre, and he being
gone, who pleases me very well with his work and I hope will use me
pretty well, then Deane and I to my chamber, and there we repeated my
yesterday's lesson about ships all the morning, and I hope I shall soon
understand it. At noon to dinner, and strange how in discourse he cries
up chymistry from some talk he has had with an acquaintance of his,
a chymist, when, poor man, he understands not one word of it. But
I discern very well that it is only his good nature, but in this of
building ships he hath taken great pains, more than most builders I
believe have. After dinner he went away, and my wife and I to church,
and after church to Sir W. Pen, and there sat and talked with him,
and the perfidious rogue seems, as he do always, mightily civil to us,
though I know he hates and envies us. So home to supper, prayers, and to
bed.

9th. Up and to my office all the morning, and there saw several things
done in my work to my great content, and at noon home to dinner, and
after dinner in Sir W. Pen's coach he set my wife and I down at the New
Exchange, and after buying some things we walked to my Lady Sandwich's,
who, good lady, is now, thanks be to God! so well as to sit up, and sent
to us, if we were not afeard, to come up to her. So we did; but she was
mightily against my wife's coming so near her; though, poor wretch! she
is as well as ever she was, as to the meazles, and nothing can I see
upon her face. There we sat talking with her above three hours, till six
o'clock, of several things with great pleasure and so away, and home
by coach, buying several things for my wife in our way, and so after
looking what had been done in my office to-day, with good content home
to supper and to bed. But, strange, how I cannot get any thing to take
place in my mind while my work lasts at my office. This day my wife and
I in our way to Paternoster Row to buy things called upon Mr. Hollyard
to advise upon her drying up her issue in her leg, which inclines of
itself to dry up, and he admits of it that it should be dried up.

10th. Up and at my office looking after my workmen all the morning, and
after the office was done did the same at night, and so home to supper
and to bed.

11th. Up and all day, both forenoon and afternoon, at my office to see
it finished by the joyners and washed and every thing in order, and
indeed now my closet is very convenient and pleasant for me. My uncle
Wight came to me to my office this afternoon to speak with me about Mr.
Maes's business again, and from me went to my house to see my wife, and
strange to think that my wife should by and by send for me after he was
gone to tell me that he should begin discourse of her want of children
and his also, and how he thought it would be best for him and her to
have one between them, and he would give her L500 either in money or
jewells beforehand, and make the child his heir. He commended her body,
and discoursed that for all he knew the thing was lawful. She says she
did give him a very warm answer, such as he did not excuse himself by
saying that he said this in jest, but told her that since he saw what
her mind was he would say no more to her of it, and desired her to make
no words of it. It seemed he did say all this in a kind of counterfeit
laugh, but by all words that passed, which I cannot now so well set
down, it is plain to me that he was in good earnest, and that I fear
all his kindness is but only his lust to her. What to think of it of a
sudden I know not, but I think not to take notice yet of it to him till
I have thought better of it. So with my mind and head a little troubled
I received a letter from Mr. Coventry about a mast for the Duke's yacht,
which with other business makes me resolve to go betimes to Woolwich
to-morrow. So to supper and to bed.

12th. Up by 4 o'clock and by water to Woolwich, where did some business
and walked to Greenwich, good discourse with Mr. Deane best part of
the way; there met by appointment Commissioner Pett, and with him to
Deptford, where did also some business, and so home to my office, and at
noon Mrs. Hunt and her cozens child and mayd came and dined with me. My
wife sick ... in bed. I was troubled with it, but, however, could not
help it, but attended them till after dinner, and then to the office and
there sat all the afternoon, and by a letter to me this afternoon from
Mr. Coventry I saw the first appearance of a warr with Holland. So home;
and betimes to bed because of rising to-morrow.

13th. Up before three o'clock, and a little after upon the water, it
being very light as at noon, and a bright sunrising; but by and by a
rainbow appeared, the first that ever in a morning I saw, and then it
fell a-raining a little, but held up again, and I to Woolwich, where
before all the men came to work I with Mr. Deane spent two hours upon
the new ship, informing myself in the names and natures of many parts
of her to my great content, and so back again, without doing any thing
else, and after shifting myself away to Westminster, looking after
Mr. Maes's business and others. In the Painted Chamber I heard a
fine conference between some of the two Houses upon the Bill for
Conventicles. The Lords would be freed from having their houses searched
by any but the Lord Lieutenant of the County; and upon being found
guilty, to be tried only by their peers; and thirdly, would have it
added, that whereas the Bill says, "That that, among other things,
shall be a conventicle wherein any such meeting is found doing any thing
contrary to the Liturgy of the Church of England," they would have it
added, "or practice." The Commons to the Lords said, that they knew not
what might hereafter be found out which might be called the practice of
the Church of England; for there are many things may be said to be the
practice of the Church, which were never established by any law, either
common, statute, or canon; as singing of psalms, binding up prayers at
the end of the Bible, and praying extempore before and after sermon:
and though these are things indifferent, yet things for aught they at
present know may be started, which may be said to be the practice of the
Church which would not be fit to allow. For the Lords' priviledges,
Mr. Walter told them how tender their predecessors had been of the
priviledges of the Lords; but, however, where the peace of the kingdom
stands in competition with them, they apprehend those priviledges must
give place. He told them that he thought, if they should owne all to be
the priviledges of the Lords which might be demanded, they should be led
like the man (who granted leave to his neighbour to pull off his horse's
tail, meaning that he could not do it at once) that hair by hair had his
horse's tail pulled off indeed: so the Commons, by granting one thing
after another, might be so served by the Lords. Mr. Vaughan, whom I
could not to my grief perfectly hear, did say, if that they should be
obliged in this manner to, exempt the Lords from every thing, it would
in time come to pass that whatever (be [it] never so great) should be
voted by the Commons as a thing penall for a commoner, the contrary
should be thought a priviledge to the Lords: that also in this business,
the work of a conventicle being but the work of an hour, the cause of
a search would be over before a Lord Lieutenant, who may be many miles
off, can be sent for; and that all this dispute is but about L100; for
it is said in the Act, that it shall be banishment or payment of L100.
I thereupon heard the Duke of Lenox say, that there might be Lords who
could not always be ready to lose L100, or some such thing: They broke
up without coming to any end in it. There was also in the Commons' House
a great quarrel about Mr. Prin, and it was believed that he should have
been sent to the Towre, for adding something to a Bill (after it was
ordered to be engrossed) of his own head--a Bill for measures for wine
and other things of that sort, and a Bill of his owne bringing in; but
it appeared he could not mean any hurt in it. But, however, the King was
fain to write in his behalf, and all was passed over. But it is worth my
remembrance, that I saw old Ryly the Herald, and his son; and spoke to
his son, who told me in very bad words concerning Mr. Prin, that the
King had given him an office of keeping the Records; but that he never
comes thither, nor had been there these six months: so that I perceive
they expect to get his imployment from him. Thus every body is liable to
be envied and supplanted. At noon over to the Leg, where Sir G. Ascue,
Sir Robt. Parkhurst and Sir W. Pen dined. A good dinner and merry.
Thence to White Hall walking up and down a great while, but the Council
not meeting soon enough I went homeward, calling upon my cozen Roger
Pepys, with whom I talked and heard so much from him of his desire that
I would see my brother's debts paid, and things still of that nature
tending to my parting with what I get with pain to serve others'
expenses that I was cruelly vexed. Thence to Sir R. Bernard, and there
heard something of Pigott's delay of paying our money, that that also
vexed me mightily. So home and there met with a letter from my cozen
Scott, which tells me that he is resolved to meddle no more with our
business, of administering for my father, which altogether makes me
almost distracted to think of the trouble that I am like to meet with by
other folks' business more than ever I hope to have by my owne. So with
great trouble of mind to bed.

14th. Up, full of pain, I believe by cold got yesterday. So to the
office, where we sat, and after office home to dinner, being in
extraordinary pain. After dinner my pain increasing I was forced to go
to bed, and by and by my pain rose to be as great for an hour or two as
ever I remember it was in any fit of the stone, both in the lower
part of my belly and in my back also. No wind could I break. I took
a glyster, but it brought away but a little, and my height of pain
followed it. At last after two hours lying thus in most extraordinary
anguish, crying and roaring, I know not what, whether it was my great
sweating that may do it, but upon getting by chance, among my other
tumblings, upon my knees, in bed, my pain began to grow less and less,
till in an hour after I was in very little pain, but could break no
wind, nor make any water, and so continued, and slept well all night.

15th (Lord's day). Rose, and as I had intended without reference to this
pain, took physique, and it wrought well with me, my wife lying from me
to-night, the first time she did in the same house ever since we were
married, I think (unless while my father was in town, that he lay with
me). She took physique also to-day, and both of our physiques wrought
well, so we passed our time to-day, our physique having done working,
with some pleasure talking, but I was not well, for I could make no
water yet, but a drop or two with great pain, nor break any wind. In
the evening came Mr. Vernatty to see me and discourse about my Lord
Peterborough's business, and also my uncle Wight and Norbury, but I took
no notice nor showed any different countenance to my uncle Wight, or
he to me, for all that he carried himself so basely to my wife the last
week, but will take time to make my use of it. So, being exceeding hot,
to bed, and slept well.

16th. Forced to rise because of going to the Duke to St. James's, where
we did our usual business, and thence by invitation to Mr. Pierces the
chyrurgeon, where I saw his wife, whom I had not seen in many months
before. She holds her complexion still, but in everything else, even in
this her new house and the best rooms in it, and her closet which
her husband with some vainglory took me to show me, she continues the
eeriest slattern that ever I knew in my life. By and by we to see an
experiment of killing a dogg by letting opium into his hind leg. He and
Dr. Clerke did fail mightily in hitting the vein, and in effect did not
do the business after many trials; but with the little they got in, the
dogg did presently fall asleep, and so lay till we cut him up, and a
little dogg also, which they put it down his throate; he also staggered
first, and then fell asleep, and so continued. Whether he recovered or
no, after I was gone, I know not, but it is a strange and sudden effect.
Thence walked to Westminster Hall, where the King was expected to come
to prorogue the House, but it seems, afterwards I hear, he did not
come. I promised to go again to Mr. Pierce's, but my pain grew so great,
besides a bruise I got to-day in my right testicle, which now vexes me
as much as the other, that I was mighty melancholy, and so by coach
home and there took another glyster, but find little good by it, but
by sitting still my pain of my bruise went away, and so after supper to
bed, my wife and I having talked and concluded upon sending my father an
offer of having Pall come to us to be with us for her preferment, if by
any means I can get her a husband here, which, though it be some trouble
to us, yet it will be better than to have her stay there till nobody
will have her and then be flung upon my hands.

17th. Slept well all night and lay long, then rose and wrote my letter
to my father about Pall, as we had resolved last night. So to dinner
and then to the office, finding myself better than I was, and making
a little water, but not yet breaking any great store of wind, which I
wonder at, for I cannot be well till I do do it. After office home and
to supper and with good ease to bed, and endeavoured to tie my hands
that I might not lay them out of bed, by which I believe I have got
cold, but I could not endure it.

18th. Up and within all the morning, being willing to keep as much as
I could within doors, but receiving a very wakening letter from Mr.
Coventry about fitting of ships, which speaks something like to be done,
I went forth to the office, there to take order in things, and after
dinner to White Hall to a Committee of Tangier, but did little. So home
again and to Sir W. Pen, who, among other things of haste in this new
order for ships, is ordered to be gone presently to Portsmouth to look
after the work there. I staid to discourse with him, and so home to
supper, where upon a fine couple of pigeons, a good supper; and here I
met a pretty cabinet sent me by Mr. Shales, which I give my wife, the
first of that sort of goods I ever had yet, and very conveniently it
comes for her closett. I staid up late finding out the private boxes,
but could not do some of them, and so to bed, afraid that I have been
too bold to-day in venturing in the cold. This day I begun to drink
butter-milke and whey, and I hope to find great good by it.

19th. Up, and it being very rayny weather, which makes it cooler than
it was, by coach to Charing Cross with Sir W. Pen, who is going to
Portsmouth this day, and left him going to St. James's to take leave
of the Duke, and I to White Hall to a Committee of Tangier; where God
forgive how our Report of my Lord Peterborough's accounts was read over
and agreed to by the Lords, without one of them understanding it! And
had it been what it would, it had gone: and, besides, not one thing
touching the King's profit in it minded or hit upon. Thence by coach
home again, and all the morning at the office, sat, and all the
afternoon till 9 at night, being fallen again to business, and I hope
my health will give me leave to follow it. So home to supper and to bed,
finding myself pretty well. A pretty good stool, which I impute to my
whey to-day, and broke wind also.

20th. Up and to my office, whither by and by comes Mr. Cholmely, and
staying till the rest of the company come he told me how Mr. Edward
Montagu is turned out of the Court, not [to] return again. His fault,
I perceive, was his pride, and most of all his affecting to seem great
with the Queene and it seems indeed had more of her eare than any body
else, and would be with her talking alone two or three hours together;
insomuch that the Lords about the King, when he would be jesting with
them about their wives, would tell the King that he must have a care
of his wife too, for she hath now the gallant: and they say the King
himself did once ask Montagu how his mistress (meaning the Queene) did.
He grew so proud, and despised every body, besides suffering nobody, he
or she, to get or do any thing about the Queene, that they all laboured
to do him a good turn. They also say that he did give some affront to
the Duke of Monmouth, which the King himself did speak to him of. But
strange it is that this man should, from the greatest negligence in the
world, come to be the miracle of attendance, so as to take all offices
from everybody, either men or women, about the Queene. Insomuch that he
was observed as a miracle, but that which is the worst, that which in
a wise manner performed [would] turn to his greatest advantage, was by
being so observed employed to his greatest wrong, the world concluding
that there must be something more than ordinary to cause him to do this.
So he is gone, nobody pitying but laughing at him; and he pretends only
that he is gone to his father, that is sick in the country. By and by
comes Povy, Creed, and Vernatty, and so to their accounts, wherein more
trouble and vexation with Povy. That being done, I sent them going and
myself fell to business till dinner. So home to dinner very pleasant.
In the afternoon to my office, where busy again, and by and by came a
letter from my father so full of trouble for discontents there between
my mother and servants, and such troubles to my father from hence from
Cave that hath my brother's bastard that I know not what in the world to
do, but with great trouble, it growing night, spent some time walking,
and putting care as much as I could out of my head, with my wife in the
garden, and so home to supper and to bed.

21st. Up, called by Mr. Cholmely, and walked with him in the garden till
others came to another Committee of Tangier, as we did meet as we did
use to do, to see more of Povy's folly, and so broke up, and at the
office sat all the morning, Mr. Coventry with us, and very hot we are
getting out some ships. At noon to the 'Change, and there did some
business, and thence home to dinner, and so abroad with my wife by coach
to the New Exchange, and there laid out almost 40s. upon her, and so
called to see my Lady Sandwich, whom we found in her dining-room, which
joyed us mightily; but she looks very thin, poor woman, being mightily
broke. She told us that Mr. Montagu is to return to Court, as she hears,
which I wonder at, and do hardly believe. So home and to my office,
where late, and so home to supper and to bed.

22nd (Lord's day). Up and by water to White Hall to my Lord's lodgings,
and with him walked to White Hall without any great discourse, nor do I
find that he do mind business at all. Here the Duke of Yorke called me
to him, to ask me whether I did intend to go with him to Chatham or no.
I told him if he commanded, but I did believe there would be business
here for me, and so he told me then it would be better to stay, which
I suppose he will take better than if I had been forward to go. Thence,
after staying and seeing the throng of people to attend the King to
Chappell (but, Lord! what a company of sad, idle people they are) I
walked to St. James's with Colonell Remes, where staid a good while and
then walked to White Hall with Mr. Coventry, talking about business. So
meeting Creed, took him with me home and to dinner, a good dinner,
and thence by water to Woolwich, where mighty kindly received by Mrs.
Falconer and her husband, who is now pretty well again, this being the
first time I ever carried my wife thither. I walked to the Docke, where
I met Mrs. Ackworth alone at home, and God forgive me! what thoughts
I had, but I had not the courage to stay, but went to Mr. Pett's
and walked up and down the yard with him and Deane talking about the
dispatch of the ships now in haste, and by and by Creed and my wife and
a friend of Mr. Falconer's came with the boat and called me, and so by
water to Deptford, where I landed, and after talking with others walked
to Half-way house with Mr. Wayth talking about the business of his
supplying us with canvas, and he told me in discourse several instances
of Sir W. Batten's cheats. So to Half-way house, whither my wife and
them were gone before, and after drinking there we walked, and by water
home, sending Creed and the other with the boat home. Then wrote a
letter to Mr. Coventry, and so a good supper of pease, the first I eat
this year, and so to bed.

23rd. Up and to the office, where Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, and
myself met and did business, we being in a mighty hurry. The King is
gone down with the Duke and a great crew this morning by break of day
to Chatham. Towards noon I and my wife by water to Woolwich, leaving my
wife at Mr. Falconer's, and Mr. Hater and I with some officers of the
yard on board to see several ships how ready they are. Then to Mr.
Falconer's to a good dinner, having myself carried them a vessel of
sturgeon and a Lamprey pie, and then to the Yarde again, and among
other things did at Mr. Ackworth's obtain a demonstration of his being
a knave; but I did not discover it, till it be a little more seasonable.
So back to the Ropeyard and took my wife and Mr. Hater back, it raining
mighty hard of a sudden, but we with the tilt

     [Tilt (A.S. teld) represents a tent or awning.  It was used for a
     cloth covering for a cart or waggon, or for a canopy or awning over
     a portion of a boat.]

kept ourselves dry. So to Deptford, did some business there; but, Lord!
to see how in both places the King's business, if ever it should come to
a warr, is likely to be done, there not being a man that looks or speaks
like a man that will take pains, or use any forecast to serve the King,
at which I am heartily troubled. So home, it raining terribly, but we
still dry, and at the office late discoursing with Sir J. Minnes and
Sir W. Batten, who like a couple of sots receive all I say but to little
purpose. So late home to supper and to bed.

24th. Up and to the office, where Sir J. Minnes and I sat all the
morning, and after dinner thither again, and all the afternoon hard at
the office till night, and so tired home to supper and to bed. This day
I heard that my uncle Fenner is dead, which makes me a little sad, to
see with what speed a great many of my friends are gone, and more, I
fear, for my father's sake, are going.

25th. Took physique betimes and to sleep, then up, it working all the
morning. At noon dined, and in the afternoon in my chamber spending
two or three hours to look over some unpleasant letters and things of
trouble to answer my father in, about Tom's business and others, that
vexed me, but I did go through it and by that means eased my mind very
much. This afternoon also came Tom and Charles Pepys by my sending for,
and received of me L40 in part towards their L70 legacy of my uncle's.
Spent the evening talking with my wife, and so to bed.

26th. Up to the office, where we sat, and I had some high words with Sir
W. Batten about canvas, wherein I opposed him and all his experience,
about seams in the middle, and the profit of having many breadths and
narrow, which I opposed to good purpose, to the rejecting of the whole
business. At noon home to dinner, and thence took my wife by coach, and
she to my Lady Sandwich to see her. I to Tom Trice, to discourse about
my father's giving over his administration to my brother, and thence to
Sir R. Bernard, and there received L19 in money, and took up my father's
bond of L21, that is L40, in part of Piggot's L209 due to us, which
L40 he pays for 7 roods of meadow in Portholme. Thence to my wife, and
carried her to the Old Bayly, and there we were led to the Quest House,
by the church, where all the kindred were by themselves at the buriall
of my uncle Fenner; but, Lord! what a pitiful rout of people there was
of them, but very good service and great company the whole was. And so
anon to church, and a good sermon, and so home, having for ease put
my L19 into W. Joyce's hand, where I left it. So to supper and to bed,
being in a little pain from some cold got last night lying without
anything upon my feet.

27th. Up, not without some pain by cold, which makes me mighty
melancholy, to think of the ill state of my health. To the office, where
busy till my brains ready to drop with variety of business, and vexed
for all that to see the service like to suffer by other people's
neglect. Vexed also at a letter from my father with two troublesome ones
enclosed from Cave and Noble, so that I know not what to do therein. At
home to dinner at noon. But to comfort my heart, Captain Taylor this day
brought me L20 he promised me for my assistance to him about his masts.
After dinner to the office again, and thence with Mr. Wayth to St.
Catherine's to see some variety of canvas's, which indeed was worth
my seeing, but only I was in some pain, and so took not the delight I
should otherwise have done. So home to the office, and there busy till
late at night, and so home to supper and to bed. This morning my taylor
brought me a very tall mayde to be my cook-mayde; she asked L5, but my
wife offered her but L3 10s.--whether she will take it or no I know not
till to-morrow, but I am afeard she will be over high for us, she having
last been a chamber mayde, and holds up her head, as my little girle Su
observed.

28th. Up pretty well as to pain and wind, and to the office, where we
sat close and did much business. At noon I to the 'Change, and thence
to Mr. Cutler's, where I heard Sir W. Rider was, where I found them at
dinner and dined with them, he having yesterday and to-day a fit of a
pain like the gout, the first time he ever had it. A good dinner. Good
discourse, Sir W. Rider especially much fearing the issue of a Dutch
warr, wherein I very highly commend him. Thence home, and at the
office a while, and then with Mr. Deane to a second lesson upon my
Shipwrightry, wherein I go on with great pleasure. He being gone I to
the office late, and so home to supper and to bed. But, Lord! to see
how my very going to the 'Change, and being without my gowne, presently
brought me wind and pain, till I came home and was well again; but I am
come to such a pass that I shall not know what to do with myself, but
I am apt to think that it is only my legs that I take cold in from my
having so long worn a gowne constantly.

29th (Whitsunday. King's Birth and Restauration day). Up, and having
received a letter last night desiring it from Mr. Coventry, I walked
to St. James's, and there he and I did long discourse together of the
business of the office, and the warr with the Dutch; and he seemed to
argue mightily with the little reason that there is for all this. For
first, as to the wrong we pretend they have done us: that of the East
Indys, for their not delivering of Poleron, it is not yet known whether
they have failed or no; that of their hindering the Leopard cannot
amount to above L3,000 if true; that of the Guinny Company, all they had
done us did not amount to above L200 or L300 he told me truly; and that
now, from what Holmes, without any commission, hath done in taking an
island and two forts, hath set us much in debt to them; and he believes
that Holmes will have been so puffed up with this, that he by this time
hath been enforced with more strength than he had then, hath, I say,
done a great deale more wrong to them. He do, as to the effect of the
warr, tell me clearly that it is not any skill of the Dutch that can
hinder our trade if we will, we having so many advantages over them, of
winds, good ports, and men; but it is our pride, and the laziness of the
merchant. He seems to think that there may be some negotiation which may
hinder a warr this year, but that he speaks doubtfully as unwilling I
perceive to be thought to discourse any such thing. The main thing he
desired to speake with me about was, to know whether I do understand my
Lord Sandwich's intentions as to going to sea with this fleete; saying,
that the Duke, if he desires it, is most willing to it; but thinking
that twelve ships is not a fleete fit for my Lord to be troubled to
go out with, he is not willing to offer it to him till he hath some
intimations of his mind to go, or not. He spoke this with very great
respect as to my Lord, though methinks it is strange they should not
understand one another better at this time than to need another's
mediation. Thence walked over the Parke to White Hall, Mr. Povy with me,
and was taken in a very great showre in the middle of the Parke that we
were very wet. So up into, the house and with him to the King's closett,
whither by and by the King came, my Lord Sandwich carrying the sword.
A Bishopp preached, but he speaking too low for me to hear behind the
King's closett, I went forth and walked and discoursed with Colonell
Reames, who seems a very willing man to be informed in his business of
canvas, which he is undertaking to strike in with us to serve the Navy.
By and by my Lord Sandwich came forth, and called me to him: and we fell
into discourse a great while about his business, wherein he seems to
be very open with me, and to receive my opinion as he used to do; and
I hope I shall become necessary to him again. He desired me to think of
the fitness, or not, for him to offer himself to go to sea; and to give
him my thoughts in a day or two. Thence after sermon among the ladies on
the Queene's side; where I saw Mrs. Stewart, very fine and pretty, but
far beneath my Lady Castlemayne. Thence with Mr. Povy home to dinner;
where extraordinary cheer. And after dinner up and down to see his
house. And in a word, methinks, for his perspective upon his wall in
his garden, and the springs rising up with the perspective in the little
closett; his room floored above with woods of several colours, like but
above the best cabinet-work I ever saw; his grotto and vault, with his
bottles of wine, and a well therein to keep them cool; his furniture
of all sorts; his bath at the top of his house, good pictures, and his
manner of eating and drinking; do surpass all that ever I did see of one
man in all my life. Thence walked home and found my uncle Wight and Mr.
Rawlinson, who supped with me. They being gone, I to bed, being in some
pain from my being so much abroad to-day, which is a most strange thing
that in such warm weather the least ayre should get cold and wind in me.
I confess it makes me mighty sad and out of all content in the world.

30th. Lay long, the bells ringing, it being holiday, and then up and
all the day long in my study at home studying of shipmaking with great
content till the evening, and then came Mr. Howe and sat and then supped
with me. He is a little conceited, but will make a discreet man. He
being gone, a little to my office, and then home to bed, being in much
pain from yesterday's being abroad, which is a consideration of mighty
sorrow to me.

31st. Up, and called upon Mr. Hollyard, with whom I advised and shall
fall upon some course of doing something for my disease of the
wind, which grows upon me every day more and more. Thence to my Lord
Sandwich's, and while he was dressing I below discoursed with Captain
Cooke, and I think if I do find it fit to keep a boy at all I had as
good be supplied from him with one as any body. By and by up to my Lord,
and to discourse about his going to sea, and the message I had from Mr.
Coventry to him. He wonders, as he well may, that this course should
be taken, and he every day with the Duke, who, nevertheless, seems
most friendly to him, who hath not yet spoke one word to my Lord of his
desire to have him go to sea. My Lord do tell me clearly that were it
not that he, as all other men that were of the Parliament side, are
obnoxious to reproach, and so is forced to bear what otherwise he would
not, he would never suffer every thing to be done in the Navy, and he
never be consulted; and it seems, in the naming of all these commanders
for this fleete, he hath never been asked one question. But we concluded
it wholly inconsistent with his honour not to go with this fleete, nor
with the reputation which the world hath of his interest at Court;
and so he did give me commission to tell Mr. Coventry that he is most
willing to receive any commands from the Duke in this fleete, were
it less than it is, and that particularly in this service. With
this message I parted, and by coach to the office, where I found Mr.
Coventry, and told him this. Methinks, I confess, he did not seem so
pleased with it as I expected, or at least could have wished, and asked
me whether I had told my Lord that the Duke do not expect his going,
which I told him I had. But now whether he means really that the Duke,
as he told me the other day, do think the Fleete too small for him
to take or that he would not have him go, I swear I cannot tell. But
methinks other ways might have been used to put him by without going in
this manner about it, and so I hope it is out of kindness indeed. Dined
at home, and so to the office, where a great while alone in my office,
nobody near, with Bagwell's wife of Deptford, but the woman seems so
modest that I durst not offer any courtship to her, though I had it in
my mind when I brought her in to me. But I am resolved to do her husband
a courtesy, for I think he is a man that deserves very well. So abroad
with my wife by coach to St. James's, to one Lady Poultny's, where I
found my Lord, I doubt, at some vain pleasure or other. I did give him a
short account of what I had done with Mr. Coventry, and so left him, and
to my wife again in the coach, and with her to the Parke, but the Queene
being gone by the Parke to Kensington, we staid not but straight home
and to supper (the first time I have done so this summer), and so to
my office doing business, and then to my monthly accounts, where to my
great comfort I find myself better than I was still the last month, and
now come to L930. I was told to-day, that upon Sunday night last, being
the King's birth-day, the King was at my Lady Castlemayne's lodgings
(over the hither-gates at Lambert's lodgings) dancing with fiddlers all
night almost; and all the world coming by taking notice of it, which I
am sorry to hear. The discourse of the town is only whether a warr with
Holland or no, and we are preparing for it all we can, which is but
little. Myself subject more than ordinary to pain by winde, which makes
me very sad, together with the trouble which at present lies upon me in
my father's behalf, rising from the death of my brother, which are many
and great. Would to God they were over!




JUNE 1664

June 1st. Up, having lain long, going to bed very late after the ending
of my accounts. Being up Mr. Hollyard came to me, and to my great
sorrow, after his great assuring me that I could not possibly have the
stone again, he tells me that he do verily fear that I have it again,
and has brought me something to dissolve it, which do make me very
much troubled, and pray to God to ease me. He gone, I down by water to
Woolwich and Deptford to look after the dispatch of the ships, all the
way reading Mr. Spencer's Book of Prodigys, which is most ingeniously
writ, both for matter and style. Home at noon, and my little girl got me
my dinner, and I presently out by water and landed at Somerset stairs,
and thence through Covent Garden, where I met with Mr. Southwell (Sir W.
Pen's friend), who tells me the very sad newes of my Lord Tiviott's and
nineteen more commission officers being killed at Tangier by the Moores,
by an ambush of the enemy upon them, while they were surveying their
lines; which is very sad, and, he says, afflicts the King much. Thence
to W. Joyce's, where by appointment I met my wife (but neither of them
at home), and she and I to the King's house, and saw "The Silent Woman;"
but methought not so well done or so good a play as I formerly thought
it to be, or else I am nowadays out of humour. Before the play was done,
it fell such a storm of hayle, that we in the middle of the pit were
fain to rise;

     [The stage was covered in by a tiled roof, but the pit was open to
     the sky.  "The pit lay open to the weather for sake of light, but
     was subsequently covered in with a glazed cupola, which, however,
     only imperfectly protected the audience, so that in stormy weather
     the house was thrown into disorder, and the people in the pit were
     fain to rise" (Cunningham's "Story of Nell Gwyn," ed. 1893, p. 33).]

and all the house in a disorder, and so my wife and I out and got into a
little alehouse, and staid there an hour after the play was done before
we could get a coach, which at last we did (and by chance took up Joyce
Norton and Mrs. Bowles, and set them at home), and so home ourselves,
and I, after a little to my office, so home to supper and to bed.

2nd. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and then to
the 'Change, where after some stay by coach with Sir J. Minnes and Mr.
Coventry to St. James's, and there dined with Mr. Coventry very finely,
and so over the Parke to White Hall to a Committee of Tangier about
providing provisions, money, and men for Tangier. At it all the
afternoon, but it is strange to see how poorly and brokenly things are
done of the greatest consequence, and how soon the memory of this great
man is gone, or, at least, out of mind by the thoughts of who goes next,
which is not yet knowne. My Lord of Oxford, Muskerry, and several others
are discoursed of. It seems my Lord Tiviott's design was to go a mile
and half out of the towne, to cut down a wood in which the enemy did use
to lie in ambush. He had sent several spyes; but all brought word that
the way was clear, and so might be for any body's discovery of an enemy
before you are upon them. There they were all snapt, he and all his
officers, and about 200 men, as they say; there being left now in the
garrison but four captains. This happened the 3d of May last, being not
before that day twelvemonth of his entering into his government there:
but at his going out in the morning he said to some of his officers,
"Gentlemen, let us look to ourselves, for it was this day three years
that so many brave Englishmen were knocked on the head by the Moores,
when Fines made his sally out." Here till almost night, and then home
with Sir J. Minnes by coach, and so to my office a while, and home to
supper and bed, being now in constant pain in my back, but whether it be
only wind or what it is the Lord knows, but I fear the worst.

3rd. Up, still in a constant pain in my back, which much afflicts me
with fear of the consequence of it. All the morning at the office, we
sat at the office extraordinary upon the business of our stores, but,
Lord! what a pitiful account the Surveyor makes of it grieves my heart.
This morning before I came out I made a bargain with Captain Taylor for
a ship for the Commissioners for Tangier, wherein I hope to get L40 or
L50. To the 'Change, and thence home and dined, and then by coach to
White Hall, sending my wife to Mrs. Hunt's. At the Committee for Tangier
all the afternoon, where a sad consideration to see things of so great
weight managed in so confused a manner as it is, so as I would not
have the buying of an acre of land bought by the Duke of York and Mr.
Coventry, for ought I see, being the only two that do anything like men;
Prince Rupert do nothing but swear and laugh a little, with an oathe or
two, and that's all he do. Thence called my wife and home, and I late
at my office, and so home to supper and to bed, pleased at my hopes of
gains by to-day's work, but very sad to think of the state of my health.

4th. Up and to St. James's by coach, after a good deal of talk before
I went forth with J. Noble, who tells me that he will secure us against
Cave, that though he knows, and can prove it, yet nobody else can
prove it, to be Tom's child; that the bond was made by one Hudson, a
scrivener, next to the Fountaine taverne, in the Old Bayly; that the
children were born, and christened, and entered in the parish-book of
St. Sepulchre's, by the name of Anne and Elizabeth Taylor and he will
give us security against Cave if we pay him the money. And then up to
the Duke, and was with him giving him an account how matters go, and
of the necessity there is of a power to presse seamen, without which we
cannot really raise men for this fleete of twelve sayle, besides that it
will assert the King's power of pressing, which at present is somewhat
doubted, and will make the Dutch believe that we are in earnest. Thence
by water to the office, where we sat till almost two o'clock. This
morning Captain Ferrer came to the office to tell me that my Lord hath
given him a promise of Young's place in the Wardrobe, and hearing that I
pretend a promise to it he comes to ask my consent, which I denied him,
and told him my Lord may do what he pleases with his promise to me, but
my father's condition is not so as that I should let it go if my Lord
will stand to his word, and so I sent him going, myself being troubled
a little at it. After office I with Mr. Coventry by water to St. James's
and dined with him, and had excellent discourse from him. So to the
Committee for Tangier all afternoon, where still the same confused
doings, and my Lord Fitz-Harding now added to the Committee; which will
signify much. It grieves me to see how brokenly things are ordered. So
by coach home, and at my office late, and so to supper and to bed, my
body by plenty of breaking of wind being just now pretty well again,
having had a constant akeing in my back these 5 or 6 days. Mr. Coventry
discoursing this noon about Sir W. Batten (what a sad fellow he is!)
told me how the King told him the other day how Sir W. Batten, being
in the ship with him and Prince Rupert when they expected to fight with
Warwick, did walk up and down sweating with a napkin under his throat to
dry up his sweat; and that Prince Rupert being a most jealous man, and
particularly of Batten, do walk up and down swearing bloodily to the
King, that Batten had a mind to betray them to-day, and that the napkin
was a signal; "but, by God," says he, "if things go ill, the first thing
I will do is to shoot him." He discoursed largely and bravely to me
concerning the different sort of valours, the active and passive valour.
For the latter, he brought as an instance General Blake; who, in the
defending of Taunton and Lime for the Parliament, did through his
stubborn sort of valour defend it the most 'opiniastrement' that ever
any man did any thing; and yet never was the man that ever made
any attaque by land or sea, but rather avoyded it on all, even fair
occasions. On the other side, Prince Rupert, the boldest attaquer in the
world for personal courage; and yet, in the defending of Bristol, no man
ever did anything worse, he wanting the patience and seasoned head to
consult and advise for defence, and to bear with the evils of a siege.
The like he says is said of my Lord Tiviott, who was the boldest
adventurer of his person in the world, and from a mean man in few years
was come to this greatness of command and repute only by the death
of all his officers, he many times having the luck of being the only
survivor of them all, by venturing upon services for the King of France
that nobody else would; and yet no man upon a defence, he being all fury
and no judgment in a fight. He tells me above all of the Duke of Yorke,
that he is more himself and more of judgement is at hand in him in the
middle of a desperate service, than at other times, as appeared in the
business of Dunkirke, wherein no man ever did braver things, or was in
hotter service in the close of that day, being surrounded with enemies;
and then, contrary to the advice of all about him, his counsel carried
himself and the rest through them safe, by advising that he might make
his passage with but a dozen with him; "For," says he, "the enemy cannot
move after me so fast with a great body, and with a small one we shall
be enough to deal with them;" and though he is a man naturally martiall
to the highest degree, yet a man that never in his life talks one word
of himself or service of his owne, but only that he saw such or such a
thing, and lays it down for a maxime that a Hector can have no courage.
He told me also, as a great instance of some men, that the Prince of
Condo's excellence is, that there not being a more furious man in the
world, danger in fight never disturbs him more than just to make him
civill, and to command in words of great obligation to his officers and
men; but without any the least disturbance in his judgment or spirit.

5th (Lord's day). About one in the morning I was knocked up by my mayds
to come to my wife who is very ill. I rose, and from some cold she got
to-day, or from something else, she is taken with great gripings, a
looseness, and vomiting. I lay a while by her upon the bed, she being
in great pain, poor wretch, but that being a little over I to bed again,
and lay, and then up and to my office all the morning, setting matters
to rights in some accounts and papers, and then to dinner, whither
Mr. Shepley, late come to town, came to me, and after dinner and
some pleasant discourse he went his way, being to go out of town
to Huntington again to-morrow. So all the afternoon with my wife
discoursing and talking, and in the evening to my office doing business,
and then home to supper and to bed.

6th. Up and found my wife very ill again, which troubles me, but I was
forced to go forth. So by water with Mr. Gauden and others to see a ship
hired by me for the Commissioners of Tangier, and to give order therein.
So back to the office, and by coach with Mr. Gauden to White Hall, and
there to my Lord Sandwich, and here I met Mr. Townsend very opportunely
and Captain Ferrer, and after some discourse we did accommodate the
business of the Wardrobe place, that he shall have the reversion if he
will take it out by giving a covenant that if Mr. Young' dyes before my
father my father shall have the benefit of it for his life. So home, and
thence by water to Deptford, and there found our Trinity Brethren come
from their election to church, where Dr. Britton made, methought, an
indifferent sermon touching the decency that we ought to observe in
God's house, the church, but yet to see how ridiculously some men will
carry themselves. Sir W. Batten did at open table anon in the name of
the whole Society desire him to print his sermon, as if the Doctor could
think that they were fit judges of a good sermon. Then by barge with Sir
W. Batten to Trinity House. It seems they have with much ado carried
it for Sir G. Carteret against Captain Harrison, poor man, who by
succession ought to have been it, and most hands were for him, but only
they were forced to fright the younger Brethren by requiring them to set
their hands (which is an ill course) and then Sir G. Carteret carryed
it. Here was at dinner my Lord Sandwich, Mr. Coventry, my Lord Craven,
and others. A great dinner, and good company. Mr. Prin also, who would
not drink any health, no, not the King's, but sat down with his hat on
all the while;

     [William Prynne had published in 1628 a small book against the
     drinking of healths, entitled, "Healthes, Sicknesse; or a
     compendious and briefe Discourse, prouing, the Drinking and Pledging
     of Healthes to be sinfull and utterly unlawfull unto Christians
 ... wherein all those ordinary objections, excuses or pretences,
     which are made to justifie, extenuate, or excuse the drinking or
     pledging of Healthes are likewise cleared and answered."  The
     pamphlet was dedicated to Charles I. as "more interessed in the
     theame and subject of this compendious discourse then any other that
     I know," and "because your Majestie of all other persons within your
     owne dominions, are most dishonoured, prejudiced, and abused by
     these Healthes."]

but nobody took notice of it to him at all; but in discourse with
the Doctor he did declare himself that he ever was, and has expressed
himself in all his books for mixt communion against the Presbyterian
examination. Thence after dinner by water, my Lord Sandwich and all
us Tangier men, where at the Committee busy till night with great
confusion, and then by coach home, with this content, however, that I
find myself every day become more and more known, and shall one day hope
to have benefit by it. I found my wife a little better. A little to my
office, then home to supper and to bed.

7th. Up and to the office (having by my going by water without any
thing upon my legs yesterday got some pain upon me again), where all the
morning. At noon a little to the 'Change, and thence home to dinner, my
wife being ill still in bed. Thence to the office, where busy all the
afternoon till 9 at night, and so home to my wife, to supper, and to
bed.

8th. All day before dinner with Creed, talking of many things, among
others, of my Lord's going so often to Chelsy, and he, without my
speaking much, do tell me that his daughters do perceive all, and do
hate the place, and the young woman there, Mrs. Betty Becke; for my
Lord, who sent them thither only for a disguise for his going thither,
will come under pretence to see them, and pack them out of doors to the
Parke, and stay behind with her; but now the young ladies are gone to
their mother to Kensington. To dinner, and after dinner till 10 at night
in my study writing of my old broken office notes in shorthand all in
one book, till my eyes did ake ready to drop out. So home to supper and
to bed.

9th. Up and at my office all the morning. At noon dined at home, Mr.
Hunt and his kinswoman (wife in the country), after dinner I to the
office, where we sat all the afternoon. Then at night by coach to attend
the Duke of Albemarle about the Tangier ship. Coming back my wife spied
me going home by coach from Mr. Hunt's, with whom she hath gained much
in discourse to-day concerning W. Howe's discourse of me to him. That he
was the man that got me to be secretary to my Lord; and all that I have
thereby, and that for all this I never did give him 6d. in my life.
Which makes me wonder that this rogue dare talk after this manner, and I
think all the world is grown false. But I hope I shall make good use
of it. So home to supper and to bed, my eyes aching mightily since last
night.

10th. Up and by water to White Hall, and there to a Committee of
Tangier, and had occasion to see how my Lord Ashworth--[Lord Ashworth
is probably a miswriting for Lord Ashley (afterwards Earl of
Shaftesbury).]--deports himself, which is very fine indeed, and it joys
my heart to see that there is any body looks so near into the King's
business as I perceive he do in this business of my Lord Peterborough's
accounts. Thence into the Parke, and met and walked with Captain Sylas
Taylor, my old acquaintance while I was of the Exchequer, and Dr. Whore,
talking of musique, and particularly of Mr. Berckenshaw's way, which
Taylor magnifies mightily, and perhaps but what it deserves, but not
so easily to be understood as he and others make of it. Thence home
by water, and after dinner abroad to buy several things, as a map, and
powder, and other small things, and so home to my office, and in the
evening with Captain Taylor by water to our Tangier ship, and so home,
well pleased, having received L26 profit to-day of my bargain for this
ship, which comforts me mightily, though I confess my heart, what with
my being out of order as to my health, and the fear I have of the money
my Lord oweth me and I stand indebted to him in, is much cast down of
late. In the evening home to supper and to bed.

11th. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, where some
discourse arose from Sir G. Carteret and Mr. Coventry, which gives me
occasion to think that something like a war is expected now indeed,
though upon the 'Change afterwards I hear too that an Embassador is
landed from Holland, and one from their East India Company, to treat
with ours about the wrongs we pretend to. Mr. Creed dined with me, and
thence after dinner by coach with my wife only to take the ayre, it
being very warm and pleasant, to Bowe and Old Ford; and thence to
Hackney. There 'light, and played at shuffle-board, eat cream and good
churies; and so with good refreshment home. Then to my office vexed with
Captain Taylor about the delay of carrying down the ship hired by me for
Tangier, and late about that and other things at the office. So home to
supper and to bed.

12th (Lord's day). All the morning in my chamber consulting my lesson of
ship building, and at noon Mr. Creed by appointment came and dined with
us, and sat talking all the afternoon till, about church time, my
wife and I began our great dispute about going to Griffin's child's
christening, where I was to have been godfather, but Sir J. Minnes
refusing, he wanted an equal for me and my Lady Batten, and so sought
for other. Then the question was whether my wife should go, and she
having dressed herself on purpose, was very angry, and began to talk
openly of my keeping her within doors before Creed, which vexed me to
the guts, but I had the discretion to keep myself without passion, and
so resolved at last not to go, but to go down by water, which we did
by H. Russell--[a waterman]--to the Half-way house, and there eat and
drank, and upon a very small occasion had a difference again broke out,
where without any the least cause she had the cunning to cry a great
while, and talk and blubber, which made me mighty angry in mind, but
said nothing to provoke her because Creed was there, but walked home,
being troubled in my mind also about the knavery and neglect of Captain
Fudge and Taylor, who were to have had their ship for Tangier ready by
Thursday last, and now the men by a mistake are come on board, and not
any master or man or boy of the ship's company on board with them when
we came by her side this afternoon, and also received a letter from Mr.
Coventry this day in complaint of it. We came home, and after supper
Creed went home, and I to bed. My wife made great means to be friends,
coming to my bedside and doing all things to please me, and at last I
could not hold out, but seemed pleased, and so parted, and I with much
ado to sleep, but was easily wakened by extraordinary great rain, and
my mind troubled the more to think what the soldiers would do on board
tonight in all this weather.

13th. So up at 5 o'clock, and with Captain Taylor on board her at
Deptford, and found all out of order, only the soldiers civil, and Sir
Arthur Bassett a civil person. I rated at Captain Taylor, whom, contrary
to my expectation, I found a lying and a very stupid blundering fellow,
good for nothing, and yet we talk of him in the Navy as if he had been
an excellent officer, but I find him a lying knave, and of no judgment
or dispatch at all. After finding the condition of the ship, no master,
not above four men, and many ship's provisions, sayls, and other things
wanting, I went back and called upon Fudge, whom I found like a lying
rogue unready to go on board, but I did so jeer him that I made him get
every thing ready, and left Taylor and H. Russell to quicken him, and so
away and I by water on to White Hall, where I met his Royal Highnesse at
a Tangier Committee about this very thing, and did there satisfy him how
things are, at which all was pacified without any trouble, and I hope
may end well, but I confess I am at a real trouble for fear the rogue
should not do his work, and I come to shame and losse of the money I did
hope justly to have got by it. Thence walked with Mr. Coventry to St.
James's, and there spent by his desire the whole morning reading of some
old Navy books given him of old Sir John Cooke's by the Archbishop of
Canterbury that now is; wherein the order that was observed in the Navy
then, above what it is now, is very observable, and fine things we did
observe in our reading. Anon to dinner, after dinner to discourse of the
business of the Dutch warr, wherein he tells me the Dutch do in every
particular, which are but few and small things that we can demand
of them, whatever cry we unjustly make, do seem to offer at an
accommodation, for they do owne that it is not for their profit to have
warr with England. We did also talk of a History of the Navy of England,
how fit it were to be writ; and he did say that it hath been in his
mind to propose to me the writing of the History of the late Dutch
warr, which I am glad to hear, it being a thing I much desire, and sorts
mightily with my genius; and, if well done, may recommend me much. So he
says he will get me an order for making of searches to all records, &c.,
in order thereto, and I shall take great delight in doing of it. Thence
by water down to the Tower, and thither sent for Mr. Creed to my house,
where he promised to be, and he and I down to the ship, and find all
things in pretty good order, and I hope will end to my mind. Thence
having a gaily down to Greenwich, and there saw the King's works, which
are great, a-doing there, and so to the Cherry Garden, and so carried
some cherries home, and after supper to bed, my wife lying with me,
which from my not being thoroughly well, nor she, we have not done above
once these two or three weeks.

14th. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and had great
conflict about the flags again, and am vexed methought to see my Lord
Berkely not satisfied with what I said, but however I stop the King's
being abused by the flag makers for the present. I do not know how it
may end, but I will do my best to preserve it. So home to dinner, and
after dinner by coach to Kensington. In the way overtaking Mr. Laxton,
the apothecary, with his wife and daughters, very fine young lasses,
in a coach; and so both of us to my Lady Sandwich, who hath lain this
fortnight here at Deane Hodges's. Much company came hither to-day, my
Lady Carteret, &c., Sir William Wheeler and his lady, and, above all,
Mr. Becke, of Chelsy, and wife and daughter, my Lord's mistress, and one
that hath not one good feature in her face, and yet is a fine lady, of
a fine taille, and very well carriaged, and mighty discreet. I took all
the occasion I could to discourse with the young ladies in her company
to give occasion to her to talk, which now and then she did, and that
mighty finely, and is, I perceive, a woman of such an ayre, as I wonder
the less at my Lord's favour to her, and I dare warrant him she hath
brains enough to entangle him. Two or three houres we were in her
company, going into Sir H. Finche's garden, and seeing the fountayne,
and singing there with the ladies, and a mighty fine cool place it is,
with a great laver of water in the middle and the bravest place for
musique I ever heard. After much mirthe, discoursing to the ladies
in defence of the city against the country or court, and giving them
occasion to invite themselves to-morrow to me to dinner, to my venison
pasty, I got their mother's leave, and so good night, very well
pleased with my day's work, and, above all, that I have seen my Lord's
mistresse. So home to supper, and a little at my office, and to bed.

15th. Up and by appointment with Captain Witham (the Captain that
brought the newes of the disaster at Tangier, where my Lord Tiviott was
slain) and Mr. Tooker to Beares Quay, and there saw and more afterward
at the several grannarys several parcels of oates, and strange it is to
hear how it will heat itself if laid up green and not often turned. We
came not to any agreement, but did cheapen several parcels, and thence
away, promising to send again to them. So to the Victualling office, and
then home. And in our garden I got Captain Witham to tell me the whole
story of my Lord Tiviott's misfortune; for he was upon the guard with
his horse neare the towne, when at a distance he saw the enemy appear
upon a hill, a mile and a half off, and made up to them, and with much
ado escaped himself; but what became of my Lord he neither knows nor
thinks that any body but the enemy can tell. Our losse was about four
hundred. But he tells me that the greater wonder is that my Lord Tiviott
met no sooner with such a disaster; for every day he did commit himself
to more probable danger than this, for now he had the assurance of all
his scouts that there was no enemy thereabouts; whereas he used every
day to go out with two or three with him, to make his discoveries, in
greater danger, and yet the man that could not endure to have anybody
else to go a step out of order to endanger himself. He concludes him to
be the man of the hardest fate to lose so much honour at one blow that
ever was. His relation being done he parted; and so I home to look after
things for dinner. And anon at noon comes Mr. Creed by chance, and by
and by the three young ladies:--[Lord Sandwich's daughters.]--and
very merry we were with our pasty, very well baked; and a good dish of
roasted chickens; pease, lobsters, strawberries. And after dinner to
cards: and about five o'clock, by water down to Greenwich; and up to the
top of the hill, and there played upon the ground at cards. And so to
the Cherry Garden, and then by water singing finely to the Bridge, and
there landed; and so took boat again, and to Somersett House. And by
this time, the tide being against us, it was past ten of the clock; and
such a troublesome passage, in regard of my Lady Paulina's fearfullness,
that in all my life I never did see any poor wretch in that condition.
Being come hither, there waited for them their coach; but it being so
late, I doubted what to do how to get them home. After half an hour's
stay in the street, I sent my wife home by coach with Mr. Creed's boy;
and myself and Creed in the coach home with them. But, Lord! the fear
that my Lady Paulina was in every step of the way; and indeed at this
time of the night it was no safe thing to go that road; so that I was
even afeard myself, though I appeared otherwise.--We came safe, however,
to their house, where all were abed; we knocked them up, my Lady and all
the family being in bed. So put them into doors; and leaving them with
the mayds, bade them good night, and then into the towne, Creed and I,
it being about twelve o'clock and past; and to several houses, inns, but
could get no lodging, all being in bed. At the last house, at last,
we found some people drinking and roaring; and there got in, and after
drinking, got an ill bed, where

16th. I lay in my drawers and stockings and wastecoate till five of the
clock, and so up; and being well pleased with our frolique, walked to
Knightsbridge, and there eat a messe of creame, and so to St. James's,
and there walked a little, and so I to White Hall, and took coach, and
found my wife well got home last night, and now in bed. So I to the
office, where all the morning, and at noon to the 'Change, so home and
to my office, where Mr. Ackworth came to me (though he knows himself
and I know him to be a very knave), yet he came to me to discover the
knavery of other people like the most honest man in the world. However,
good use I shall make of his discourse, for in this he is much in the
right. He being gone I to the 'Change, Mr. Creed with me, after we had
been by water to see a vessell we have hired to carry more soldiers to
Tangier, and also visited a rope ground, wherein I learnt several useful
things. The talk upon the 'Change is, that De Ruyter is dead, with
fifty men of his own ship, of the plague, at Cales: that the Holland
Embassador here do endeavour to sweeten us with fair words; and things
likely to be peaceable. Home after I had spoke with my cozen Richard
Pepys upon the 'Change, about supplying us with bewpers from Norwich,
which I should be glad of, if cheap. So home to supper and bed.

17th. Up, and to my office, where I dispatched much business, and then
down by water to Woolwich to make a discovery of a cheate providing for
us in the working of some of our own ground Tows into new cordage, to be
sold to us for Riga cordage. Thence to Mr. Falconer's, where I met Sir
W. Batten and Lady, and Captain Tinker, and there dined with them,
and so to the Dockyarde and to Deptford by water, and there very long
informing myself in the business of flags and bewpers and other things,
and so home late, being weary, and full of good information to-day, but
I perceive the corruptions of the Navy are of so many kinds that it is
endless to look after them, especially while such a one as Sir W. Batten
discourages every man that is honest. So home to my office, there very
late, and then to supper and to bed mightily troubled in my mind to hear
how Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes do labour all they can to abuse or
enable others to abuse the King.

18th. From morning till 11 at night (only a little at dinner at home)
at my office very busy, setting many businesses in order to my great
trouble, but great content in the end. So home to supper and to bed.
Strange to see how pert Sir W. Pen is to-day newly come from Portsmouth
with his head full of great reports of his service and the state of the
ships there. When that is over he will be just as another man again or
worse. But I wonder whence Mr. Coventry should take all this care for
him, to send for him up only to look after his Irish business with my
Lord Ormond and to get the Duke's leave for him to come with so much
officiousness, when I am sure he knows him as well as I do as to his
little service he do.

19th (Lord's day). Up, and all the morning and afternoon (only at dinner
at home) at my office doing many businesses for want of time on the week
days. In the afternoon the greatest shower of rain of a sudden and the
greatest and most continued thunder that ever I heard I think in my
life. In the evening home to my wife, and there talked seriously of
several of our family concernments, and among others of bringing Pall
out of the country to us here to try to put her off, which I am very
desirous, and my wife also of. So to supper, prayers, which I have of
late too much omitted. So to bed.

20th. It having been a very cold night last night I had got some cold,
and so in pain by wind, and a sure precursor of pain is sudden letting
off farts, and when that stops, then my passages stop and my pain
begins. Up and did several businesses, and so with my wife by water to
White Hall, she to her father's, I to the Duke, where we did our usual
business. And among other discourse of the Dutch, he was merrily saying
how they print that Prince Rupert, Duke of Albemarle, and my Lord
Sandwich, are to be Generalls; and soon after is to follow them "Vieux
Pen;" and so the Duke called him in mirth Old Pen. They have, it seems,
lately wrote to the King, to assure him that their setting-out ships
were only to defend their fishing-trade, and to stay near home, not to
annoy the King's subjects; and to desire that he would do the like with
his ships: which the King laughs at, but yet is troubled they should
think him such a child, to suffer them to bring home their fish and East
India Company's ships, and then they will not care a fart for us. Thence
to Westminster Hall, it being term time, meeting Mr. Dickering, he tells
me how my Lady last week went to see Mrs. Becke, the mother; and by and
by the daughter came in, but that my Lady do say herself, as he says,
that she knew not for what reason, for she never knew they had a
daughter, which I do not believe. She was troubled, and her heart did
rise as soon as she appeared, and seems the most ugly woman that ever
she saw. This if true were strange, but I believe it is not. Thence to
my Lord's lodgings; and were merry with the young ladies, who make a
great story of their appearing before their mother the morning after we
carried them, the last week, home so late; and that their mother took it
very well, at least without any anger. Here I heard how the rich widow,
my Lady Gold, is married to one Neale, after he had received a box on
the eare by her brother (who was there a sentinel, in behalf of some
courtier) at the door; but made him draw, and wounded him. She called
Neale up to her, and sent for a priest, married presently, and went to
bed. The brother sent to the Court, and had a serjeant sent for Neale;
but Neale sent for him up to be seen in bed, and she owned him for her
husband: and so all is past. It seems Sir H. Bennet did look after her.
My Lady very pleasant. After dinner came in Sir Thomas Crew and Mr.
Sidney, lately come from France, who is growne a little, and a pretty
youth he is; but not so improved as they did give him out to be, but
like a child still. But yet I can perceive he hath good parts and good
inclinations. Thence with Creed, who dined here, to Westminster to find
out Mr. Hawly, and did, but he did not accept of my offer of his being
steward to my Lord at sea. Thence alone to several places about my law
businesses, and with good success; at last I to Mr. Townsend at the
Wardrobe, and received kind words from him to be true to me against
Captain Ferrers his endeavours to get the place from my father as my
Lord hath promised him. Here met Will. Howe, and he went forth with me;
and by water back to White Hall to wait on my Lord, who is come back
from Hinchinbroke; where he has been about 4 or 5 days. But I was never
more vexed to see how an over-officious visitt is received, for
he received me with as little concernment as in the middle of his
discontent, and a fool I am to be of so servile a humour, and vexed with
that consideration I took coach home, and could not get it off my mind
all night. To supper and to bed, my wife finding fault with Besse for
her calling upon Jane that lived with us, and there heard Mrs. Harper
and her talk ill of us and not told us of it. With which I was also
vexed, and told her soundly of it till she cried, poor wench, and I hope
without dissimulation, and yet I cannot tell; however, I was glad to see
in what manner she received it, and so to sleep.

21st. Being weary yesterday with walking I sleep long, and at last up
and to the office, where all the morning. At home to dinner, Mr. Deane
with me. After dinner I to White Hall (setting down my wife by the
way) to a Committee of Tangier, where the Duke of Yorke, I perceive, do
attend the business very well, much better than any man there or most
of them, and my [mind] eased of some trouble I lay under for fear of his
thinking ill of me from the bad successe in the setting forth of these
crew men to Tangier. Thence with Mr. Creed, and walked in the Parke, and
so to the New Exchange, meeting Mr. Moore, and he with us. I shewed him
no friendly look, but he took no notice to me of the Wardrobe business,
which vexes me. I perceive by him my Lord's business of his family and
estate goes very ill, and runs in debt mightily. I would to God I were
clear of it, both as to my owne money and the bond of L1000, which I
stand debtor for him in, to my cozen Thomas Pepys. Thence by coach home
and to my office a little, and so to supper and to bed.

22nd. Up and I found Mr. Creed below, who staid with me a while,
and then I to business all the morning. At noon to the 'Change and
Coffee-house, where great talke of the Dutch preparing of sixty sayle of
ships. The plague grows mightily among them, both at sea and land. From
the 'Change to dinner to Trinity House with Sir W. Rider and Cutler,
where a very good dinner. Here Sir G. Ascue dined also, who I perceive
desires to make himself known among the seamen. Thence home, there
coming to me my Lord Peterborough's Sollicitor with a letter from him to
desire present dispatch in his business of freight, and promises me L50,
which is good newes, and I hope to do his business readily for him. This
much rejoiced me. All the afternoon at his business, and late at night
comes the Sollicitor again, and I with him at 9 o'clock to Mr. Povy's,
and there acquainted him with the business. The money he won't pay
without warrant, but that will be got done in a few days. So home by
coach and to bed.

23rd. Up, and to the office, and there we sat all the morning. So to
the 'Change, and then home to dinner and to my office, where till 10
at night very busy, and so home to supper and to bed. My cozen, Thomas
Pepys, was with me yesterday and I took occasion to speak to him about
the bond I stand bound for my Lord Sandwich to him in L1000. I did very
plainly, obliging him to secrecy, tell him how the matter stands, yet
with all duty to my Lord my resolution to be bound for whatever he
desires me for him, yet that I would be glad he had any other security.
I perceive by Mr. Moore today that he hath been with my Lord, and my
Lord how he takes it I know not, but he is looking after other security
and I am mighty glad of it. W. Howe was with me this afternoon, to
desire some things to be got ready for my Lord against his going down to
his ship, which will be soon; for it seems the King and both the Queenes
intend to visit him. The Lord knows how my Lord will get out of this
charge; for Mr. Moore tells me to-day that he is L10,000 in debt and
this will, with many other things that daily will grow upon him (while
he minds his pleasure as he do), set him further backward. But it was
pretty this afternoon to hear W. Howe mince the matter, and say that he
do believe that my Lord is in debt L2000 or L3000, and then corrected
himself and said, No, not so, but I am afraid he is in debt L1000. I
pray God gets me well rid of his Lordship as to his debt, and I care
not.

24th. Up and out with Captain Witham in several places again to look for
oats for Tangier, and among other places to the City granarys, where
it seems every company have their granary and obliged to keep such a
quantity of corne always there or at a time of scarcity to issue so much
at so much a bushell: and a fine thing it is to see their stores of
all sorts, for piles for the bridge, and for pipes, a thing I never saw
before.

     [From the commencement of the reign of Henry VIII., or perhaps
     earlier, it was the custom of the City of London to provide against
     scarcity, by requiring each of the chartered Companies to keep in
     store a certain quantity of corn, which was to be renewed from time
     to time, and when required for that purpose, produced in the market
     for sale, at such times and prices, and in such quantities, as the
     Lord Mayor or Common Council should direct.  See the report of a
     case in the Court of Chancery, "Attorney-General v. Haberdashers'
     Company" (Mylne and Keens "Reports," vol. i., p. 420).--B.]

Thence to the office, and there busy all the morning. At noon to my
uncle Wight's, and there dined, my wife being there all the morning.
After dinner to White Hall; and there met with Mr. Pierce, and he showed
me the Queene's bed-chamber, and her closett, where she had nothing but
some pretty pious pictures, and books of devotion; and her holy water at
her head as she sleeps, with her clock by her bed-side, wherein a lamp
burns that tells her the time of the night at any time. Thence with him
to the Parke, and there met the Queene coming from Chappell, with her
Mayds of Honour, all in silver-lace gowns again: which is new to me, and
that which I did not think would have been brought up again. Thence he
carried me to the King's closett: where such variety of pictures, and
other things of value and rarity, that I was properly confounded and
enjoyed no pleasure in the sight of them; which is the only time in my
life that ever I was so at a loss for pleasure, in the greatest plenty
of objects to give it me. Thence home, calling in many places and doing
abundance of errands to my great content, and at night weary home, where
Mr. Creed waited for me, and he and I walked in the garden, where
he told me he is now in a hurry fitting himself for sea, and that it
remains that he deals as an ingenuous man with me in the business I wot
of, which he will do before he goes. But I perceive he will have me do
many good turns for him first, both as to his bills coming to him in
this office, and also in his absence at the Committee of Tangier, which
I promise, and as he acquits himself to me I will willingly do. I would
I knew the worst of it, what it is he intends, that so I may either quit
my hands of him or continue my kindness still to him.

25th. We staid late, and he lay with me all night and rose very merry
talking, and excellent company he is, that is the truth of it, and a
most cunning man. He being gone I to the office, where we sat all the
morning. At noon to dinner, and then to my office busy, and by and by
home with Mr. Deane to a lesson upon raising a Bend of Timbers,

     [This seems to refer to knee timber, of which there was not a
     sufficient supply.  A proposal was made to produce this bent wood
     artificially: "June 22, 1664.  Sir William Petty intimated that it
     seemed by the scarcity and greater rate of knee timber that nature
     did not furnish crooked wood enough for building: wherefore he
     thought it would be fit to raise by art, so much of it in
     proportion, as to reduce it to an equal rate with strait timber"
     (Birch's "History of the Royal Society,")]

and he being gone I to the office, and there came Captain Taylor, and he
and I home, and I have done all very well with him as to the business of
the last trouble, so that come what will come my name will be clear of
any false dealing with him. So to my office again late, and then to bed.

26th (Lord's day). Up, and Sir J. Minnes set me down at my Lord
Sandwich's, where I waited till his coming down, when he came, too,
could find little to say to me but only a general question or two, and
so good-bye. Here his little daughter, my Lady Katharine was brought,
who is lately come from my father's at Brampton, to have her cheek
looked after, which is and hath long been sore. But my Lord will rather
have it be as it is, with a scarr in her face, than endanger it being
worse by tampering. He being gone, I went home, a little troubled to see
he minds me no more, and with Creed called at several churches, which,
God knows, are supplied with very young men, and the churches very
empty; so home and at our owne church looked in, and there heard one
preach whom Sir W. Pen brought, which he desired us yesterday to hear,
that had been his chaplin in Ireland, a very silly fellow. So home
and to dinner, and after dinner a frolique took us, we would go this
afternoon to the Hope; so my wife dressed herself, and, with good
victuals and drink, we took boat presently and the tide with us got
down, but it was night, and the tide spent by the time we got to
Gravesend; so there we stopped, but went not on shore, only Creed, to
get some cherries,

     [Pliny tells us that cherries were introduced into Britain by the
     Romans, and Lydgate alludes to them as sold in the London streets.
     Richard Haines, fruiterer to Henry VI IL, imported a number of
     cherry trees from Flanders, and planted them at Tenham, in Kent.
     Hence the fame of the Kentish cherries.]

and send a letter to the Hope, where the Fleete lies. And so, it being
rainy, and thundering mightily, and lightning, we returned. By and
by the evening turned mighty clear and moonshine; we got with great
pleasure home, about twelve o'clock, which did much please us, Creed
telling pretty stories in the boat. He lay with me all night.

27th. Up, and he and I walked to Paul's Church yard, and there saw Sir
Harry Spillman's book, and I bespoke it and others, and thence we took
coach, and he to my Lord's and I to St. James's, where we did our usual
business, and thence I home and dined, and then by water to Woolwich,
and there spent the afternoon till night under pretence of buying
Captain Blackman's house and grounds, and viewing the ground took notice
of Clothiers' cordage with which he, I believe, thinks to cheat the
King. That being done I by water home, it being night first, and there I
find our new mayd Jane come, a cook mayd. So to bed.

28th. Up, and this day put on a half shirt first this summer, it being
very hot; and yet so ill-tempered I am grown, that I am afeard I shall
catch cold, while all the world is ready to melt away. To the office
all the morning, at noon to dinner at home, then to my office till the
evening, then out about several businesses and then by appointment to
the 'Change, and thence with my uncle Wight to the Mum house, and there
drinking, he do complain of his wife most cruel as the most troublesome
woman in the world, and how she will have her will, saying she brought
him a portion and God knows what. By which, with many instances more, I
perceive they do live a sad life together. Thence to the Mitre and there
comes Dr. Burnett to us and Mr. Maes, but the meeting was chiefly to
bring the Doctor and me together, and there I began to have his advice
about my disease, and then invited him to my house: and I am resolved
to put myself into his hands. Here very late, but I drank nothing, nor
will, though he do advise me to take care of cold drinks. So home and to
bed.

29th. Up, and Mr. Shepley came to me, who is lately come to town; among
other things I hear by him how the children are sent for away from my
father's, but he says without any great discontent. I am troubled there
should be this occasion of difference, and yet I am glad they are gone,
lest it should have come to worse. He tells me how my brave dogg I did
give him, going out betimes one morning to Huntington, was set upon by
five other doggs, and worried to pieces, of which I am a little, and
he the most sorry I ever saw man for such a thing. Forth with him and
walked a good way talking, then parted and I to the Temple, and to
my cozen Roger Pepys, and thence by water to Westminster to see Dean
Honiwood, whom I had not visited a great while. He is a good-natured,
but a very weak man, yet a Dean, and a man in great esteem. Thence
walked to my Lord Sandwich's, and there dined, my Lord there. He was
pleasant enough at table with me, but yet without any discourse of
business, or any regard to me when dinner was over, but fell to cards,
and my Lady and I sat two hours alone, talking of the condition of
her family's being greatly in debt, and many children now coming up to
provide for. I did give her my sense very plain of it, which she took
well and carried further than myself, to the bemoaning their condition,
and remembering how finely things were ordered about six years ago, when
I lived there and my Lord at sea every year. Thence home, doing several
errands by the way. So to my office, and there till late at night, Mr.
Comander coming to me for me to sign and seal the new draft of my will,
which I did do, I having altered something upon the death of my brother
Tom. So home to supper and to bed.

30th. Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning. At noon home
to dinner, Mr. Wayth with me, and by and by comes in Mr. Falconer and
his wife and dined with us, the first time she was ever here. We had a
pretty good dinner, very merry in discourse, sat after dinner an hour or
two, then down by water to Deptford and Woolwich about getting of some
business done which I was bound to by my oath this month, and though
in some things I have not come to the height of my vow of doing all my
business in paying all my petty debts and receipt of all my petty monies
due to me, yet I bless God I am not conscious of any neglect in me that
they are not done, having not minded my pleasure at all, and so being
resolved to take no manner of pleasure till it be done, I doubt not God
will forgive me for not forfeiting the L10 promised. Walked back from
Woolwich to Greenwich all alone, save a man that had a cudgell in his
hand, and, though he told me he laboured in the King's yarde, and many
other good arguments that he is an honest man, yet, God forgive me! I
did doubt he might knock me on the head behind with his club. But I got
safe home. Then to the making up my month's accounts, and find myself
still a gainer and rose to L951, for which God be blessed. I end the
month with my mind full of business and some sorrow that I have not
exactly performed all my vowes, though my not doing is not my fault, and
shall be made good out of my first leisure. Great doubts yet whether the
Dutch wary go on or no. The Fleet ready in the Hope, of twelve sayle.
The King and Queenes go on board, they say, on Saturday next. Young
children of my Lord Sandwich gone with their mayds from my mother's,
which troubles me, it being, I hear from Mr. Shepley, with great
discontent, saying, that though they buy good meate, yet can never have
it before it stinks, which I am ashamed of.




JULY 1664

July 1st. Up and within all the morning, first bringing down my Tryangle
to my chamber below, having a new frame made proper for it to stand on.
By and by comes Dr. Burnett, who assures me that I have an ulcer either
in the kidneys or bladder, for my water, which he saw yesterday, he is
sure the sediment is not slime gathered by heat, but is a direct pusse.
He did write me down some direction what to do for it, but not with the
satisfaction I expected.

                       Dr. Burnett's advice to mee.

                 The Originall is fyled among my letters.

     Take of ye Rootes of Marsh-Mallows foure ounces, of Cumfry, of
     Liquorish, of each two ounces, of ye Mowers of St. John's Wort two
     Handsfull, of ye Leaves of Plantan, of Alehoofe, of each three
     handfulls, of Selfeheale, of Red Roses, of each one Handfull, of
     Cynament, of Nutmegg, of each halfe an ounce.  Beate them well, then
     powre upon them one Quart of old Rhenish wine, and about Six houres
     after strayne it and clarify it with ye white of an Egge, and with a
     sufficient quantity of sugar, boyle it to ye consistence of a Syrrup
     and reserve it for use.

     Dissolve one spoonefull of this Syrrup in every draught of Ale or
     beere you drink.

     Morning and evening swallow ye quantity of an hazle-nutt of Cyprus
     Terebintine.

     If you are bound or have a fit of ye Stone eate an ounce of Cassia
     new drawne, from ye poynt of a knife.

     Old Canary or Malaga wine you may drinke to three or 4 glasses, but
     noe new wine, and what wine you drinke, lett it bee at meales.-[From
     a slip of paper inserted in the Diary at this place.]

I did give him a piece, with good hopes, however, that his advice will
be of use to me, though it is strange that Mr. Hollyard should never say
one word of this ulcer in all his life to me. He being gone, I to the
'Change, and thence home to dinner, and so to my office, busy till
the evening, and then by agreement came Mr. Hill and Andrews and one
Cheswicke, a maister who plays very well upon the Spinette, and we sat
singing Psalms till 9 at night, and so broke up with great pleasure,
and very good company it is, and I hope I shall now and then have their
company. They being gone, I to my office till towards twelve o'clock,
and then home and to bed. Upon the 'Change, this day, I saw how
uncertain the temper of the people is, that, from our discharging of
about 200 that lay idle, having nothing to do, upon some of our ships,
which were ordered to be fitted for service, and their works are now
done, the towne do talk that the King discharges all his men, 200
yesterday and 800 to-day, and that now he hath got L100,000 in his hand,
he values not a Dutch warr. But I undeceived a great many, telling them
how it is.

2nd. Up and to the office, where all the morning. At noon to the
'Change, and there, which is strange, I could meet with nobody that
I could invite home to my venison pasty, but only Mr. Alsopp and Mr.
Lanyon, whom I invited last night, and a friend they brought along with
them. So home and with our venison pasty we had other good meat and good
discourse. After dinner sat close to discourse about our business of
the victualling of the garrison of Tangier, taking their prices of all
provisions, and I do hope to order it so that they and I also may get
something by it, which do much please me, for I hope I may get nobly and
honestly with profit to the King. They being gone came Sir W. Warren,
and he and I discoursed long about the business of masts, and then in
the evening to my office, where late writing letters, and then home to
look over some Brampton papers, which I am under an oathe to dispatch
before I spend one half houre in any pleasure or go to bed before 12
o'clock, to which, by the grace of God, I will be true. Then to bed.
When I came home I found that to-morrow being Sunday I should gain
nothing by doing it to-night, and to-morrow I can do it very well
and better than to-night. I went to bed before my time, but with a
resolution of doing the thing to better purpose to-morrow.

3rd (Lord's day). Up and ready, and all the morning in my chamber
looking over and settling some Brampton businesses. At noon to dinner,
where the remains of yesterday's venison and a couple of brave green
geese, which we are fain to eat alone, because they will not keepe,
which troubled us. After dinner I close to my business, and before the
evening did end it with great content, and my mind eased by it. Then up
and spent the evening walking with my wife talking, and it thundering
and lightning all the evening, and this yeare have had the most of
thunder and lightning they say of any in man's memory, and so it is, it
seems, in France and everywhere else. So to prayers and to bed.

4th. Up, and many people with me about business, and then out to several
places, and so at noon to my Lord Crew's, and there dined and very much
made of there by him. He offered me the selling of some land of his in
Cambridgeshire, a purchase of about L1000, and if I can compass it I
will. After dinner I walked homeward, still doing business by the way,
and at home find my wife this day of her owne accord to have lain
out 25s. upon a pair of pendantes for her eares, which did vex me and
brought both me and her to very high and very foule words from her
to me, such as trouble me to think she should have in her mouth, and
reflecting upon our old differences, which I hate to have remembered. I
vowed to breake them, or that she should go and get what she could for
them again. I went with that resolution out of doors; the poor wretch
afterwards in a little while did send out to change them for her money
again. I followed Besse her messenger at the 'Change, and there
did consult and sent her back; I would not have them changed, being
satisfied that she yielded. So went home, and friends again as to that
business; but the words I could not get out of my mind, and so went to
bed at night discontented, and she came to bed to me, but all would not
make me friends, but sleep and rise in the morning angry. This day the
King and the Queene went to visit my Lord Sandwich and the fleete, going
forth in the Hope.

     ["Their Majesties were treated at Tilbury Hope by the Earl of
     Sandwich, returning the same day, abundantly satisfied both with the
     dutiful respects of that honourable person and with the excellent
     condition of all matters committed to his charge" ("The Newes," July
     7th, 1664).--B.]

5th. Up and to the office, where all the morning. At noon to the 'Change
a little, then with W. Howe home and dined. So after dinner to my
office, and there busy till late at night, having had among other things
much discourse with young Gregory about the Chest business, wherein Sir
W. Batten is so great a knave, and also with Alsop and Lanyon about the
Tangier victualling, wherein I hope to get something for myself. Late
home to supper and to bed, being full of thoughts of a sudden resolution
this day taken upon the 'Change of going down to-morrow to the Hope.

6th. Up very betimes, and my wife also, and got us ready; and about
eight o'clock, having got some bottles of wine and beer and neat's
tongues, we went to our barge at the Towre, where Mr. Pierce and his
wife, and a kinswoman and his sister, and Mrs. Clerke and her sister and
cozen were to expect us; and so set out for the Hope, all the way down
playing at cards and other sports, spending our time pretty merry. Come
to the Hope about one and there showed them all the ships, and had a
collacion of anchovies, gammon, &c., and after an houre's stay or more,
embarked again for home; and so to cards and other sports till we came
to Greenwich, and there Mrs. Clerke and my wife and I on shore to an
alehouse, for them to do their business, and so to the barge again,
having shown them the King's pleasure boat; and so home to the Bridge,
bringing night home with us; and it rained hard, but we got them on foot
to the Beare, and there put them into a boat, and I back to my wife in
the barge, and so to the Tower Wharf and home, being very well pleased
today with the company, especially Mrs. Pierce, who continues her
complexion as well as ever, and hath, at this day, I think, the best
complexion that ever I saw on any woman, young or old, or child either,
all days of my life. Also Mrs. Clerke's kinswoman sings very prettily,
but is very confident in it; Mrs. Clerke herself witty, but spoils all
in being so conceited and making so great a flutter with a few fine
clothes and some bad tawdry things worne with them. But the charge of
the barge lies heavy upon me, which troubles me, but it is but once, and
I may make Pierce do me some courtesy as great. Being come home, I weary
to bed with sitting. The reason of Dr. Clerke's not being here was the
King's being sicke last night and let blood, and so he durst not come
away to-day.

7th. Up, and this day begun, the first day this year, to put off my
linnen waistcoat, but it happening to be a cool day I was afraid of
taking cold, which troubles me, and is the greatest pain I have in the
world to think of my bad temper of my health. At the office all the
morning. Dined at home, to my office to prepare some things against a
Committee of Tangier this afternoon. So to White Hall, and there found
the Duke and twenty more reading their commission (of which I am, and
was also sent to, to come) for the Royall Fishery, which is very large,
and a very serious charter it is; but the company generally so ill
fitted for so serious a worke that I do much fear it will come to
little. That being done, and not being able to do any thing for lacke
of an oathe for the Governor and Assistants to take, we rose. Then our
Committee for the Tangier victualling met and did a little, and so up,
and I and Mr. Coventry walked in the garden half an hour, talking of
the business of our masts, and thence away and with Creed walked half an
hour or more in the Park, and thence to the New Exchange to drink some
creame, but missed it and so parted, and I home, calling by the way
for my new bookes, viz., Sir H. Spillman's "Whole Glossary," "Scapula's
Lexicon," and Shakespeare's plays, which I have got money out of my
stationer's bills to pay for. So home and to my office a while, and then
home and to bed, finding myself pretty well for all my waistecoate being
put off to-day. The king is pretty well to-day, though let blood the
night before yesterday.

8th. Up and called out by my Lord Peterborough's gentleman to Mr. Povy's
to discourse about getting of his money, wherein I am concerned in hopes
of the L50 my Lord hath promised me, but I dare not reckon myself sure
of it till I have it in my main,--[hand.]--for these Lords are hard to
be trusted. Though I well deserve it. I staid at Povy's for his
coming in, and there looked over his stables and every thing, but
notwithstanding all the times I have been there I do yet find many fine
things to look on. Thence to White Hall a little, to hear how the King
do, he not having been well these three days. I find that he is pretty
well again. So to Paul's Churchyarde about my books, and to the binder's
and directed the doing of my Chaucer,

     [This was Speght's edition of 1602, which is still in the Pepysian
     Library.  The book is bound in calf, with brass clasps and bosses.
     It is not lettered.]

though they were not full neate enough for me, but pretty well it is;
and thence to the clasp-maker's to have it clasped and bossed. So to the
'Change and home to dinner, and so to my office till 5 o'clock, and then
came Mr. Hill and Andrews, and we sung an houre or two. Then broke
up and Mr. Alsop and his company came and consulted about our Tangier
victualling and brought it to a good head. So they parted, and I to
supper and to bed.

9th. Up, and at the office all the morning. In the afternoon by coach
with Sir J. Minnes to White Hall, and there to a Committee for Fishing;
but the first thing was swearing to be true to the Company, and we
were all sworne; but a great dispute we had, which, methought, is very
ominous to the Company; some, that we should swear to be true to the
best of our power, and others to the best of our understanding; and
carried in the last, though in that we are the least able to serve the
Company, because we would not be obliged to attend the business when we
can, but when we list. This consideration did displease me, but it was
voted and so went. We did nothing else, but broke up till a Committee
of Guinny was set and ended, and then met again for Tangier, and there
I did my business about my Lord Peterborough's order and my own for my
expenses for the garrison lately. So home, by the way calling for my
Chaucer and other books, and that is well done to my mind, which pleased
me well. So to my office till late writing letters, and so home to my
wife to supper and bed, where we have not lain together because of the
heat of the weather a good while, but now against her going into the
country.

10th (Lord's day). Up and by water, towards noon, to Somersett House,
and walked to my Lord Sandwich's, and there dined with my Lady and the
children. And after some ordinary discourse with my Lady, after dinner
took our leaves and my wife hers, in order to her going to the country
to-morrow. But my Lord took not occasion to speak one word of my father
or mother about the children at all, which I wonder at, and begin I will
not. Here my Lady showed us my Lady Castlemayne's picture, finely done;
given my Lord; and a most beautiful picture it is. Thence with my Lady
Jemimah and Mr. Sidney to St. Gyles's Church, and there heard a long,
poore sermon. Thence set them down and in their coach to Kate Joyce's
christening, where much company, good service of sweetmeates; and after
an houre's stay, left them, and in my Lord's coach--his noble, rich
coach--home, and there my wife fell to putting things in order against
her going to-morrow, and I to read, and so to bed, where I not well, and
so had no pleasure at all with my poor wife.

11th. But betimes up this morning, and, getting ready, we by coach to
Holborne, where, at nine o'clock, they set out, and I and my man Will on
horseback, by my wife, to Barnett; a very pleasant day; and there dined
with her company, which was very good; a pretty gentlewoman with her,
that goes but to Huntington, and a neighbour to us in towne. Here we
staid two hours and then parted for all together, and my poor wife I
shall soon want I am sure. Thence I and Will to see the Wells, half a
mile off,

     [The mineral springs at Barnet Common, nearly a mile to the west of
     High Barnet.  The discovery of the wells was announced in the
     "Perfect Diurnall" of June 5th, 1652, and Fuller, writing in 1662,
     says that there are hopes that the waters may "save as many lives as
     were lost in the fatal battle at Barnet" ("Worthies," Herts).  A
     pamphlet on "The Barnet Well Water" was published by the Rev. W. M.
     Trinder, M.D., as late as the year 1800, but in 1840 the old well-
     house was pulled down.]

and there I drank three glasses, and went and walked and came back and
drunk two more; the woman would have had me drink three more; but I
could not, my belly being full, but this wrought very well, and so we
rode home, round by Kingsland, Hackney, and Mile End till we were quite
weary, and my water working at least 7 or 8 times upon the road, which
pleased me well, and so home weary, and not being very well, I betimes
to bed, and there fell into a most mighty sweat in the night, about
eleven o'clock, and there, knowing what money I have in the house and
hearing a noyse, I begun to sweat worse and worse, till I melted almost
to water. I rung, and could not in half an houre make either of the
wenches hear me, and this made me fear the more, lest they might be
gaga; and then I begun to think that there was some design in a stone
being flung at the window over our stayres this evening, by which the
thiefes meant to try what looking there would be after them and know
our company. These thoughts and fears I had, and do hence apprehend the
fears of all rich men that are covetous and have much money by them.
At last Jane rose, and then I understand it was only the dogg wants a
lodging and so made a noyse. So to bed, but hardly slept, at last did,
and so till morning,

12th. And so rose, called up by my Lord Peterborough's gentleman about
getting his Lord's money to-day of Mr. Povy, wherein I took such order,
that it was paid, and I had my L50 brought me, which comforts my heart.
We sat at the office all the morning, then at home. Dined alone; sad for
want of company and not being very well, and know not how to eat alone.
After dinner down with Sir G. Carteret, Sir J. Minnes, and Sir W. Batten
to view, and did like a place by Deptford yard to lay masts in. By
and by comes Mr. Coventry, and after a little stay he and I down to
Blackwall, he having a mind to see the yarde, which we did, and fine
storehouses there are and good docks, but of no great profit to him that
oweth them for ought we see.

     [For "owneth."  This sense is very common in Shakespeare.  In the
     original edition of the authorized version of the Bible we read: "So
     shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man that oweth this girdle"
     (Acts xxi.  I i) Nares's Glossary.]

So home by water with him, having good discourse by the way, and so I to
the office a while, and late home to supper and to bed.

13th. Up and to my office, at noon (after having at an alehouse hard
by discoursed with one Mr. Tyler, a neighbour, and one Captain Sanders
about the discovery of some pursers that have sold their provisions) I
to my Lord Sandwich, thinking to have dined there, but they not dining
at home, I with Captain Ferrers to Mr. Barwell the King's Squire Sadler,
where about this time twelvemonths I dined before at a good venison
pasty. The like we had now, and very good company, Mr. Tresham and
others. Thence to White Hall to the Fishery, and there did little. So
by water home, and there met Lanyon, &c., about Tangier matters, and
so late to my office, and thence home and to bed. Mr. Moore was with me
late to desire me to come to my Lord Sandwich tomorrow morning, which I
shall, but I wonder what my business is.

14th. My mind being doubtful what the business should be, I rose a
little after four o'clock, and abroad. Walked to my Lord's, and nobody
up, but the porter rose out of bed to me so I back again to Fleete
Streete, and there bought a little book of law; and thence, hearing a
psalm sung, I went into St. Dunstan's, and there heard prayers read,
which, it seems, is done there every morning at six o'clock; a thing I
never did do at a chappell, but the College Chappell, in all my life.
Thence to my Lord's again, and my Lord being up, was sent for up, and
he and I alone. He did begin with a most solemn profession of the same
confidence in and love for me that he ever had, and then told me what a
misfortune was fallen upon me and him: in me, by a displeasure which my
Lord Chancellor did show to him last night against me, in the highest
and most passionate manner that ever any man did speak, even to the not
hearing of any thing to be said to him: but he told me, that he did say
all that could be said for a man as to my faithfullnesse and duty to his
Lordship, and did me the greatest right imaginable. And what should the
business be, but that I should be forward to have the trees in Clarendon
Park marked and cut down, which he, it seems, hath bought of my Lord
Albemarle; when, God knows! I am the most innocent man in the world in
it, and did nothing of myself, nor knew of his concernment therein, but
barely obeyed my Lord Treasurer's warrant for the doing thereof. And
said that I did most ungentlemanlike with him, and had justified the
rogues in cutting down a tree of his; and that I had sent the veriest
Fanatique [Deane] that is in England to mark them, on purpose to
nose--[provoke]--him. All which, I did assure my Lord, was most properly
false, and nothing like it true; and told my Lord the whole passage. My
Lord do seem most nearly affected; he is partly, I believe, for me, and
partly for himself. So he advised me to wait presently upon my Lord, and
clear myself in the most perfect manner I could, with all submission and
assurance that I am his creature both in this and all other things; and
that I do owne that all I have, is derived through my Lord Sandwich from
his Lordship. So, full of horror, I went, and found him busy in tryals
of law in his great room; and it being Sitting-day, durst not stay, but
went to my Lord and told him so: whereupon he directed me to take him
after dinner; and so away I home, leaving my Lord mightily concerned for
me. I to the office, and there sat busy all the morning. At noon to the
'Change, and from the 'Change over with Alsopp and the others to the
Pope's Head tavern, and there staid a quarter of an hour, and concluded
upon this, that in case I got them no more than 3s. per week per man
I should have of them but L150 per ann., but to have it without any
adventure or charge, but if I got them 3s. 2d., then they would give me
L300 in the like manner. So I directed them to draw up their tender in
a line or two against the afternoon, and to meet me at White Hall. So
I left them, and I to my Lord Chancellor's; and there coming out after
dinner I accosted him, telling him that I was the unhappy Pepys that
had fallen into his high displeasure, and come to desire him to give me
leave to make myself better understood to his Lordship, assuring him
of my duty and service. He answered me very pleasingly, that he was
confident upon the score of my Lord Sandwich's character of me, but that
he had reason to think what he did, and desired me to call upon him some
evening: I named to-night, and he accepted of it. So with my heart light
I to White Hall, and there after understanding by a stratagem, and yet
appearing wholly desirous not to understand Mr. Gauden's price when he
desired to show it me, I went down and ordered matters in our tender
so well that at the meeting by and by I was ready with Mr. Gauden's
and his, both directed him a letter to me to give the board their two
tenders, but there being none but the Generall Monk and Mr. Coventry and
Povy and I, I did not think fit to expose them to view now, but put it
off till Saturday, and so with good content rose. Thence I to the Half
Moone, against the 'Change, to acquaint Lanyon and his friends of our
proceedings, and thence to my Lord Chancellor's, and there heard several
tryals, wherein I perceive my Lord is a most able and ready man. After
all done, he himself called, "Come, Mr. Pepys, you and I will take a
turn in the garden." So he was led down stairs, having the goute, and
there walked with me, I think, above an houre, talking most friendly,
yet cunningly. I told him clearly how things were; how ignorant I was
of his Lordship's concernment in it; how I did not do nor say one word
singly, but what was done was the act of the whole Board. He told me by
name that he was more angry with Sir G. Carteret than with me, and also
with the whole body of the Board. But thinking who it was of the Board
that knew him least, he did place his fear upon me; but he finds that
he is indebted to none of his friends there. I think I did thoroughly
appease him, till he thanked me for my desire and pains to satisfy him;
and upon my desiring to be directed who I should of his servants advise
with about this business, he told me nobody, but would be glad to hear
from me himself. He told me he would not direct me in any thing, that it
might not be said that the Lord Chancellor did labour to abuse the King;
or (as I offered) direct the suspending the Report of the Purveyors but
I see what he means, and I will make it my worke to do him service
in it. But, Lord! to see how he is incensed against poor Deane, as a
fanatique rogue, and I know not what: and what he did was done in spite
to his Lordship, among all his friends and tenants. He did plainly say
that he would not direct me in any thing, for he would not put himself
into the power of any man to say that he did so and so; but plainly
told me as if he would be glad I did something. Lord! to see how we poor
wretches dare not do the King good service for fear of the greatness of
these men. He named Sir G. Carteret, and Sir J. Minnes, and the rest;
and that he was as angry with them all as me. But it was pleasant to
think that, while he was talking to me, comes into the garden Sir G.
Carteret; and my Lord avoided speaking with him, and made him and many
others stay expecting him, while I walked up and down above an houre, I
think; and would have me walk with my hat on. And yet, after all this,
there has been so little ground for this his jealousy of me, that I am
sometimes afeard that he do this only in policy to bring me to his side
by scaring me; or else, which is worse, to try how faithfull I would
be to the King; but I rather think the former of the two. I parted with
great assurance how I acknowledged all I had to come from his Lordship;
which he did not seem to refuse, but with great kindness and respect
parted. So I by coach home, calling at my Lord's, but he not within. At
my office late, and so home to eat something, being almost starved for
want of eating my dinner to-day, and so to bed, my head being full of
great and many businesses of import to me.

15th. Up, and to my Lord Sandwich's; where he sent for me up, and I
did give my Lord an account of what had passed with my Lord Chancellor
yesterday; with which he was well pleased, and advised me by all means
to study in the best manner I could to serve him in this business. After
this discourse ended, he begun to tell me that he had now pitched upon
his day of going to sea upon Monday next, and that he would now give me
an account how matters are with him. He told me that his work now in the
world is only to keep up his interest at Court, having little hopes
to get more considerably, he saying that he hath now about L8,000 per
annum. It is true, he says, he oweth about L10,000; but he hath been at
great charges in getting things to this pass in his estate; besides his
building and good goods that he hath bought. He says he hath now evened
his reckonings at the Wardrobe till Michaelmas last, and hopes to finish
it to Ladyday before he goes. He says now there is due, too, L7,000 to
him there, if he knew how to get it paid, besides L2000 that Mr. Montagu
do owe him. As to his interest, he says that he hath had all the injury
done him that ever man could have by another bosom friend that knows
all his secrets, by Mr. Montagu; but he says that the worst of it all
is past, and he gone out and hated, his very person by the King, and he
believes the more upon the score of his carriage to him; nay, that the
Duke of Yorke did say a little while since in his closett, that he did
hate him because of his ungratefull carriage to my Lord of Sandwich. He
says that he is as great with the Chancellor, or greater, than ever in
his life. That with the King he is the like; and told me an instance,
that whereas he formerly was of the private council to the King before
he was last sicke, and that by the sickness an interruption was made
in his attendance upon him; the King did not constantly call him, as he
used to do, to his private council, only in businesses of the sea and
the like; but of late the King did send a message to him by Sir Harry
Bennet, to excuse the King to my Lord that he had not of late sent for
him as he used to do to his private council, for it was not out of any
distaste, but to avoid giving offence to some others whom he did not
name; but my Lord supposes it might be Prince Rupert, or it may be only
that the King would rather pass it by an excuse, than be thought unkind:
but that now he did desire him to attend him constantly, which of late
he hath done, and the King never more kind to him in his life than now.
The Duke of Yorke, as much as is possible; and in the business of late,
when I was to speak to my Lord about his going to sea, he says that he
finds the Duke did it with the greatest ingenuity and love in the world;
"and whereas," says my Lord, "here is a wise man hard by that thinks
himself so, and would be thought so, and it may be is in a degree so
(naming by and by my Lord Crew), would have had me condition with him
that neither Prince Rupert nor any body should come over his head, and I
know not what." The Duke himself hath caused in his commission, that he
be made Admirall of this and what other ships or fleets shall hereafter
be put out after these; which is very noble. He tells me in these cases,
and that of Mr. Montagu's, and all others, he finds that bearing of them
patiently is his best way, without noise or trouble, and things wear out
of themselves and come fair again. But, says he, take it from me, never
to trust too much to any man in the world, for you put yourself into his
power; and the best seeming friend and real friend as to the present may
have or take occasion to fall out with you, and then out comes all. Then
he told me of Sir Harry Bennet, though they were always kind, yet now
it is become to an acquaintance and familiarity above ordinary, that for
these months he hath done no business but with my Lord's advice in his
chamber, and promises all faithfull love to him and service upon all
occasions. My Lord says, that he hath the advantage of being able by his
experience to helpe and advise him; and he believes that that chiefly
do invite Sir Harry to this manner of treating him. "Now," says my Lord,
"the only and the greatest embarras that I have in the world is, how
to behave myself to Sir H. Bennet and my Lord Chancellor, in case that
there do lie any thing under the embers about my Lord Bristoll, which
nobody can tell; for then," says he, "I must appear for one or other,
and I will lose all I have in the world rather than desert my Lord
Chancellor: so that," says he, "I know not for my life what to do in
that case." For Sir H. Bennet's love is come to the height, and his
confidence, that he hath given my Lord a character, and will oblige my
Lord to correspond with him. "This," says he, "is the whole condition of
my estate and interest; which I tell you, because I know not whether I
shall see you again or no." Then as to the voyage, he thinks it will be
of charge to him, and no profit; but that he must not now look after nor
think to encrease, but study to make good what he hath, that what is due
to him from the Wardrobe or elsewhere may be paid, which otherwise would
fail, and all a man hath be but small content to him. So we seemed to
take leave one of another; my Lord of me, desiring me that I would
write to him and give him information upon all occasions in matters that
concern him; which, put together with what he preambled with yesterday,
makes me think that my Lord do truly esteem me still, and desires to
preserve my service to him; which I do bless God for. In the middle of
our discourse my Lady Crew came in to bring my Lord word that he hath
another son, my Lady being brought to bed just now, I did not think her
time had been so nigh, but she's well brought to bed, for which God be
praised! and send my Lord to study the laying up of something the more!
Then with Creed to St. James's, and missing Mr. Coventry, to White Hall;
where, staying for him in one of the galleries, there comes out of the
chayre-room Mrs. Stewart, in a most lovely form, with her hair all
about her eares, having her picture taking there. There was the King and
twenty more, I think, standing by all the while, and a lovely creature
she in this dress seemed to be. Thence to the 'Change by coach, and so
home to dinner and then to my office. In the evening Mr. Hill, Andrews
and I to my chamber to sing, which we did very pleasantly, and then to
my office again, where very late and so home, with my mind I bless God
in good state of ease and body of health, only my head at this juncture
very full of business, how to get something. Among others what this
rogue Creed will do before he goes to sea, for I would fain be rid of
him and see what he means to do, for I will then declare myself his firm
friend or enemy.

16th. Up in the morning, my head mightily confounded with the great
deale of business I have upon me to do. But to the office, and there
dispatched Mr. Creed's business pretty well about his bill; but then
there comes W. Howe for my Lord's bill of Imprest for L500 to carry with
him this voyage, and so I was at a loss how to carry myself in it, Creed
being there, but there being no help I delivered it to them both, and
let them contend, when I perceive they did both endeavour to have it,
but W. Howe took it, and the other had the discretion to suffer it. But
I think I cleared myself to Creed that it past not from any practice
of mine. At noon rose and did some necessary business at the 'Change.
Thence to Trinity House to a dinner which Sir G. Carteret makes there
as Maister this year. Thence to White Hall to the Tangier Committee, and
there, above my expectation, got the business of our contract for the
victualling carried for my people, viz., Alsopp, Lanyon, and Yeabsly;
and by their promise I do thereby get L300 per annum to myself, which
do overjoy me; and the matter is left to me to draw up. Mr. Lewes was in
the gallery and is mightily amazed at it, and I believe Mr. Gauden will
make some stir about it, for he wrote to Mr. Coventry to-day about it to
argue why he should for the King's convenience have it, but Mr. Coventry
most justly did argue freely for them that served cheapest. Thence
walked a while with Mr. Coventry in the gallery, and first find that he
is mighty cold in his present opinion of Mr. Peter Pett for his flagging
and doing things so lazily there, and he did also surprise me with
a question why Deane did not bring in their report of the timber of
Clarendon. What he means thereby I know not, but at present put him off;
nor do I know how to steer myself: but I must think of it, and advise
with my Lord Sandwich. Thence with Creed by coach to my Lord Sandwich's,
and there I got Mr. Moore to give me my Lord's hand for my receipt of
L109 more of my money of Sir G. Carteret, so that then his debt to me
will be under L500, I think. This do ease my mind also. Thence carried
him and W. Howe into London, and set them down at Sir G. Carteret's to
receive some money, and I home and there busy very late, and so home to
supper and to bed, with my mind in pretty good ease, my business being
in a pretty good condition every where.

17th (Lord's day). All the morning at my office doing business there, it
raining hard. So dined at home alone. After dinner walked to my Lord's,
and there found him and much other guests at table at dinner, and it
seems they have christened his young son to-day-called him James. I got
a piece of cake. I got my Lord to signe and seale my business about my
selling of Brampton land, which though not so full as I would, yet is as
full as I can at present. Walked home again, and there fell to read, and
by and by comes my uncle Wight, Dr. Burnett, and another gentleman,
and talked and drank, and the Doctor showed me the manner of eating,
turpentine, which pleases me well, for it is with great ease. So they
being gone, I to supper and to bed.

18th. Up, and walked to my Lord's, and there took my leave of him, he
seeming very friendly to me in as serious a manner as ever in his life,
and I believe he is very confident of me. He sets out this morning
for Deale. Thence to St. James's to the Duke, and there did our usual
business. He discourses very freely of a warr with Holland, to begin
about winter, so that I believe we shall come to it. Before we went up
to the Duke, Sir G. Carteret and I did talk together in the Parke about
my Lord Chancellor's business of the timber; he telling me freely that
my Lord Chancellor was never so angry with him in all his life, as he
was for this business, in great passion; and that when he saw me there,
he knew what it was about. And plots now with me how we may serve my
Lord, which I am mightily glad of; and I hope together we may do it.
Thence to Westminster to my barber's, to have my Periwigg he lately made
me cleansed of its nits, which vexed me cruelly that he should put such
a thing into my hands. Here meeting his mayd Jane, that has lived with
them so long, I talked with her, and sending her of an errand to Dr.
Clerk's, did meet her, and took her into a little alehouse in Brewers
Yard, and there did sport with her, without any knowledge of her though,
and a very pretty innocent girl she is. Thence to my Lord Chancellor's,
but he being busy I went away to the 'Change, and so home to dinner. By
and by comes Creed, and I out with him to Fleet Street, and he to Mr.
Povy's, I to my Lord Chancellor's, and missing him again walked to
Povy's, and there saw his new perspective in his closet. Povy, to my
great surprise and wonder, did here attacque me in his own and Mr.
Bland's behalf that I should do for them both for the new contractors
for the victualling of the garrison. Which I am ashamed that he should
ask of me, nor did I believe that he was a man that did seek benefit in
such poor things. Besides that he professed that he did not believe that
I would have any hand myself in the contract, and yet here declares that
he himself would have profit by it, and himself did move me that Sir W.
Rider might join, and Ford with Gauden. I told him I had no interest
in them, but I fear they must do something to him, for he told me that
those of the Mole did promise to consider him. Thence home and Creed
with me, and there he took occasion to owne his obligations to me, and
did lay down twenty pieces in gold upon my shelf in my closett, which
I did not refuse, but wish and expected should have been more. But,
however, this is better than nothing, and now I am out of expectation,
and shall henceforward know how to deal with him. After discourse of
settling his matters here, we went out by coach, and he 'light at the
Temple, and there took final leave of me, in order to his following my
Lord to-morrow. I to my Lord Chancellor, and discoursed his business
with him. I perceive, and he says plainly, that he will not have any man
to have it in his power to say that my Lord Chancellor did contrive the
wronging the King of his timber; but yet I perceive, he would be glad to
have service done him therein; and told me Sir G. Carteret hath told him
that he and I would look after his business to see it done in the best
manner for him. Of this I was glad, and so away. Thence home, and late
with my Tangier men about drawing up their agreement with us, wherein I
find much trouble, and after doing as much as we could to-night, broke
up and I to bed.

19th. Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning. At noon
dined alone at home. After dinner Sir W. Batten and I down by water to
Woolwich, where coming to the ropeyarde we are told that Mr. Falconer,
who hath been ill of a relapse these two days, is just now dead. We
went up to his widow, who is sicke in bed also. The poor woman in great
sorrow, and entreats our friendship, which we shall, I think, in every
thing do for her. I am sure I will. Thence to the Docke, and there in
Sheldon's garden eat some fruit; so to Deptford a little, and thence
home, it raining mightily, and being cold I doubted my health after it.
At the office till 9 o'clock about Sir W. Warren's contract for masts,
and then at home with Lanyon and Yeabsly till 12 and past about their
contract for Tangier, wherein they and I differed, for I would have it
drawn to the King's advantage, as much as might be, which they did not
like, but parted good friends; however, when they were gone, I wished
that I had forborne any disagreement till I had had their promise to me
in writing. They being gone, I to bed.

20th. Up, and a while to my office, and then home with Mr. Deane till
dinner, discoursing upon the business of my Lord Chancellor's timber in
Clarendon Parke, and how to make a report therein without offending him;
which at last I drew up, and hope it will please him. But I would to
God neither I nor he ever had had any thing to have done with it! Dined
together with a good pig, and then out by coach to White Hall, to the
Committee for Fishing; but nothing done, it being a great day to-day
there upon drawing at the Lottery of Sir Arthur Slingsby. I got in and
stood by the two Queenes and the Duchesse of Yorke, and just behind my
Lady Castlemayne, whom I do heartily adore; and good sport it was to
see how most that did give their ten pounds did go away with a pair of
globes only for their lot, and one gentlewoman, one Mrs. Fish, with the
only blanke. And one I staid to see drew a suit of hangings valued at
L430, and they say are well worth the money, or near it. One other suit
there is better than that; but very many lots of three and fourscore
pounds. I observed the King and Queenes did get but as poor lots as any
else. But the wisest man I met with was Mr. Cholmley, who insured as
many as would, from drawing of the one blank for 12d.; in which case
there was the whole number of persons to one, which I think was three or
four hundred. And so he insured about 200 for 200 shillings, so that he
could not have lost if one of them had drawn it, for there was enough
to pay the L10; but it happened another drew it, and so he got all the
money he took. I left the lottery, and went to a play, only a piece of
it, which was the Duke's house, "Worse and Worse;" just the same manner
of play, and writ, I believe, by the same man as "The Adventures of Five
Hours;" very pleasant it was, and I begin to admire Harris more than
ever. Thence to Westminster to see Creed, and he and I took a walk in
the Parke. He is ill, and not able yet to set out after my Lord, but
will do to-morrow. So home, and late at my office, and so home to bed.
This evening being moonshine I played a little late upon my flageolette
in the garden. But being at Westminster Hall I met with great news that
Mrs. Lane is married to one Martin, one that serves Captain Marsh. She
is gone abroad with him to-day, very fine. I must have a bout with her
very shortly to see how she finds marriage.

21st. Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning, among other
things making a contract with Sir W. Warren for almost 1000 Gottenburg
masts, the biggest that ever was made in the Navy, and wholly of my
compassing and a good one I hope it is for the King. Dined at Sir W.
Batten's, where I have not eat these many months. Sir G. Carteret, Mr.
Coventry, Sir J. Minnes, and myself there only, and my Lady. A good
venison pasty, and very merry, and pleasant I made myself with my
Lady, and she as much to me. This morning to the office comes Nicholas
Osborne, Mr. Gauden's clerke, to desire of me what piece of plate I
would choose to have a L100, or thereabouts, bestowed upon me in, he
having order to lay out so much; and, out of his freedom with me, do
of himself come to make this question. I a great while urged my
unwillingnesse to take any, not knowing how I could serve Mr. Gauden,
but left it wholly to himself; so at noon I find brought home in fine
leather cases, a pair of the noblest flaggons that ever I saw all the
days of my life; whether I shall keepe them or no I cannot tell; for
it is to oblige me to him in the business of the Tangier victualling,
wherein I doubt I shall not; but glad I am to see that I shall be sure
to get something on one side or other, have it which will: so, with a
merry heart, I looked upon them, and locked them up. After dinner to
[give] my Lord Chancellor a good account of his business, and he is very
well pleased therewith, and carries himself with great discretion to me,
without seeming over glad or beholding to me; and yet I know that he do
think himself very well served by me. Thence to Westminster and to Mrs.
Lane's lodgings, to give her joy, and there suffered me to deal with
her as I hoped to do, and by and by her husband comes, a sorry, simple
fellow, and his letter to her which she proudly showed me a simple,
nonsensical thing. A man of no discourse, and I fear married her to make
a prize of, which he is mistaken in, and a sad wife I believe she will
prove to him, for she urged me to appoint a time as soon as he is gone
out of town to give her a meeting next week. So by water with a couple
of cozens of Mrs. Lane's, and set them down at Queenhive, and I through
Bridge home, and there late at business, and so home to supper and to
bed.

22nd. Up and to my office, where busy all the morning. At noon to the
'Change, and so home to dinner, and then down by water to Deptford,
where coming too soon, I spent an houre in looking round the yarde, and
putting Mr. Shish

     [Jonas Shish, master-shipwright at Deptford.  There are several
     papers of his among the State Papers.  "I was at the funeral of old
     Mr. Shish, Master Shipwright of His Majesty's Yard here, an honest
     and remarkable man, and his death a public loss, for his excellent
     success in building ships (though altogether illiterate) and for
     bringing up so many of his children to be able artists.  I held up
     the pall with three knights who did him that honour, and he was
     worthy of it.  It was the custom of this good man to rise in the
     night and pray, kneeling in his own coffin, which he had lying by
     him for many years.  He was born that famous year, the Gunpowder-
     plot, 1605" (Evelyn's "Diary," May 13th, 1680).]

to measure a piece or two of timber, which he did most cruelly wrong,
and to the King's losse 12 or 13s. in a piece of 28 feet in contents.
Thence to the Clerke of the Cheques, from whose house Mr. Falconer was
buried to-day; Sir J. Minnes and I the only principal officers that
were there. We walked to church with him, and then I left them without
staying the sermon and straight home by water, and there find, as I
expected, Mr. Hill, and Andrews, and one slovenly and ugly fellow,
Seignor Pedro, who sings Italian songs to the theorbo most neatly,
and they spent the whole evening in singing the best piece of musique
counted of all hands in the world, made by Seignor Charissimi, the
famous master in Rome. Fine it was, indeed, and too fine for me to judge
of. They have spoke to Pedro to meet us every weeke, and I fear it
will grow a trouble to me if we once come to bid judges to meet us,
especially idle Masters, which do a little displease me to consider.
They gone comes Mr. Lanyon, who tells me Mr. Alsopp is now become
dangerously ill, and fears his recovery, covery, which shakes my
expectation of L630 per annum by the business; and, therefore, bless God
for what Mr. Gauden hath sent me, which, from some discourse to-day with
Mr. Osborne, swearing that he knows not any thing of this business of
the victualling; but, the contrary, that it is not that moves Mr. Gauden
to send it me, for he hath had order for it any time these two months.
Whether this be true or no, I know not; but I shall hence with the more
confidence keepe it. To supper and to the office a little, and to walk
in the garden, the moon shining bright, and fine warm fair weather, and
so home to bed.

23rd. Up, and all the morning at the office. At noon to the 'Change,
where I took occasion to break the business of my Lord Chancellor's
timber to Mr. Coventry in the best manner I could. He professed to me,
that, till, Sir G. Carteret did speake of it at the table, after our
officers were gone to survey it, he did not know that my Lord Chancellor
had any thing to do with it; but now he says that he had been told by
the Duke that Sir G. Carteret had spoke to him about it, and that he had
told the Duke that, were he in my Lord Chancellor's case, if he were his
father, he would rather fling away the gains of two or L3,000, than have
it said that the timber, which should have been the King's, if it had
continued the Duke of Albemarle's, was concealed by us in favour of my
Lord Chancellor; for, says he, he is a great man, and all such as he,
and he himself particularly, have a great many enemies that would be
glad of such an advantage against him. When I told him it was strange
that Sir J. Minnes and Sir G. Carteret, that knew my Lord Chancellor's
concernment therein, should not at first inform us, he answered me that
for Sir J. Minnes, he is looked upon to be an old good companion, but by
nobody at the other end of the towne as any man of business, and that
my Lord Chancellor, he dares say, never did tell him of it, only Sir G.
Carteret, he do believe, must needs know it, for he and Sir J. Shaw are
the greatest confidants he hath in the world. So for himself, he said,
he would not mince the matter, but was resolved to do what was fit, and
stand upon his owne legs therein, and that he would speak to the
Duke, that he and Sir G. Carteret might be appointed to attend my Lord
Chancellor in it. All this disturbs me mightily. I know not what to say
to it, nor how to carry myself therein; for a compliance will discommend
me to Mr. Coventry, and a discompliance to my Lord Chancellor. But I
think to let it alone, or at least meddle in it as little more as I can.
From thence walked toward Westminster, and being in an idle and wanton
humour, walked through Fleet Alley, and there stood a most pretty wench
at one of the doors, so I took a turn or two, but what by sense of
honour and conscience I would not go in, but much against my will took
coach and away, and away to Westminster Hall, and there 'light of Mrs.
Lane, and plotted with her to go over the water. So met at White's
stairs in Chanel Row, and over to the old house at Lambeth Marsh, and
there eat and drank, and had my pleasure of her twice, she being the
strangest woman in talk of love to her husband sometimes, and sometimes
again she do not care for him, and yet willing enough to allow me a
liberty of doing what I would with her. So spending 5s. or 6s. upon her,
I could do what I would, and after an hour's stay and more back again
and set her ashore there again, and I forward to Fleet Street, and
called at Fleet Alley, not knowing how to command myself, and went in
and there saw what formerly I have been acquainted with, the wickedness
of these houses, and the forcing a man to present expense. The woman
indeed is a most lovely woman, but I had no courage to meddle with her
for fear of her not being wholesome, and so counterfeiting that I had
not money enough, it was pretty to see how cunning she was, would not
suffer me to have to do in any manner with her after she saw I had no
money, but told me then I would not come again, but she now was sure I
would come again, but I hope in God I shall not, for though she be
one of the prettiest women I ever saw, yet I fear her abusing me. So
desiring God to forgive me for this vanity, I went home, taking some
books from my bookseller, and taking his lad home with me, to whom I
paid L10 for books I have laid up money for, and laid out within these
three weeks, and shall do no more a great while I hope. So to my office
writing letters, and then home and to bed, weary of the pleasure I have
had to-day, and ashamed to think of it.

24th (Lord's day). Up, in some pain all day from yesterday's passages,
having taken cold, I suppose. So staid within all day reading of two
or three good plays. At night to my office a little, and so home, after
supper to bed.

25th. Up, and with Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten by coach to St.
James's, but there the Duke being gone out we to my Lord Berkeley's
chamber, Mr. Coventry being there, and among other things there met with
a printed copy of the King's commission for the repair of Paul's, which
is very large, and large power for collecting money, and recovering of
all people that had bought or sold formerly any thing belonging to the
Church. And here I find my Lord Mayor of the City set in order before
the Archbishopp or any nobleman, though all the greatest officers of
state are there. But yet I do not hear by my Lord Berkeley, who is
one of them, that any thing is like to come of it. Thence back again
homewards, and Sir W. Batten and I to the Coffee-house, but no newes,
only the plague is very hot still, and encreases among the Dutch. Home
to dinner, and after dinner walked forth, and do what I could I could
not keep myself from going through Fleet Lane, but had the sense of
safety and honour not to go in, and the rather being a holiday I feared
I might meet with some people that might know me. Thence to Charing
Cross, and there called at Unthanke's to see what I owed, but found
nothing, and here being a couple of pretty ladies, lodgers in the
kitchen, I staid a little there. Thence to my barber Gervas, who this
day buries his child, which it seems was born without a passage behind,
so that it never voided any thing in the week or fortnight that it has
been born. Thence to Mr. Reeves, it coming just now in my head to buy a
microscope, but he was not within, so I walked all round that end of the
town among the loathsome people and houses, but, God be thanked! had no
desire to visit any of them. So home, where I met Mr. Lanyon, who tells
me Mr. Alsop is past hopes, which will mightily disappoint me in my
hopes there, and yet it may be not. I shall think whether it will be
safe for me to venture myself or no, and come in as an adventurer. He
gone, Mr. Cole (my old Jack Cole) comes to see and speak with me, and
his errand in short to tell me that he is giving over his trade; he can
do no good in it, and will turn what he has into money and go to sea,
his father being dead and leaving him little, if any thing. This I was
sorry to hear, he being a man of good parts, but, I fear, debauched. I
promised him all the friendship I can do him, which will end in little,
though I truly mean it, and so I made him stay with me till 11 at night,
talking of old school stories, and very pleasing ones, and truly I find
that we did spend our time and thoughts then otherwise than I think boys
do now, and I think as well as methinks that the best are now. He supped
with me, and so away, and I to bed. And strange to see how we are all
divided that were bred so long at school together, and what various
fortunes we have run, some good, some bad.

26th. All the morning at the office, at noon to Anthony Joyce's, to
our gossip's dinner. I had sent a dozen and a half of bottles of wine
thither, and paid my double share besides, which is 18s. Very merry we
were, and when the women were merry and rose from table, I above
with them, ne'er a man but I, I began discourse of my not getting of
children, and prayed them to give me their opinions and advice, and they
freely and merrily did give me these ten, among them (1) Do not hug my
wife too hard nor too much; (2) eat no late suppers; (3) drink juyce
of sage; (4) tent and toast; (5) wear cool holland drawers; (6) keep
stomach warm and back cool; (7) upon query whether it was best to do at
night or morn, they answered me neither one nor other, but when we had
most mind to it; (8) wife not to go too straight laced; (9) myself to
drink mum and sugar; (10) Mrs. Ward did give me, to change my place.
The 3rd, 4th, 6th, 7th, and 10th they all did seriously declare, and lay
much stress upon them as rules fit to be observed indeed, and especially
the last, to lie with our heads where our heels do, or at least to make
the bed high at feet and low at head. Very merry all, as much as I
could be in such sorry company. Great discourse of the fray yesterday
in Moorefields, how the butchers at first did beat the weavers (between
whom there hath been ever an old competition for mastery), but at last
the weavers rallied and beat them. At first the butchers knocked down
all for weavers that had green or blue aprons, till they were fain to
pull them off and put them in their breeches. At last the butchers were
fain to pull off their sleeves, that they might not be known, and were
soundly beaten out of the field, and some deeply wounded and bruised;
till at last the weavers went out tryumphing, calling L100 for a
butcher. I to Mr. Reeves to see a microscope, he having been with me
to-day morning, and there chose one which I will have. Thence back and
took up young Mrs. Harman, a pretty bred and pretty humoured woman whom
I could love well, though not handsome, yet for her person and carriage,
and black. By the way met her husband going for her, and set them both
down at home, and so home to my office a while, and so to supper and
bed.

27th. Up, and after some discourse with Mr. Duke, who is to be Secretary
to the Fishery, and is now Secretary to the Committee for Trade, who
I find a very ingenious man, I went to Mr. Povy's, and there heard a
little of his empty discourse, and fain he would have Mr. Gauden been
the victualler for Tangier, which none but a fool would say to me when
he knows he hath made it his request to me to get him something of these
men that now do it. Thence to St. James's, but Mr. Coventry being ill
and in bed I did not stay, but to White Hall a little, walked up and
down, and so home to fit papers against this afternoon, and after dinner
to the 'Change a little, and then to White Hall, where anon the Duke
of Yorke came, and a Committee we had of Tangier, where I read over my
rough draught of the contract for Tangier victualling, and acquainted
them with the death of Mr. Alsopp, which Mr. Lanyon had told me this
morning, which is a sad consideration to see how uncertain a thing
our lives are, and how little to be presumed of in our greatest
undertakings. The words of the contract approved of, and I home and
there came Mr. Lanyon to me and brought my neighbour, Mr. Andrews, to
me, whom he proposes for his partner in the room of Mr. Alsopp, and
I like well enough of it. We read over the contract together, and
discoursed it well over and so parted, and I am glad to see it once over
in this condition again, for Mr. Lanyon and I had some discourse to-day
about my share in it, and I hope if it goes on to have my first hopes of
L300 per ann. They gone, I to supper and to bed. This afternoon came my
great store of Coles in, being to Chaldron, so that I may see how long
they will last me.

28th. At the office all the morning, dined, after 'Change, at home, and
then abroad, and seeing "The Bondman" upon the posts, I consulted my
oaths and find I may go safely this time without breaking it; I went
thither, notwithstanding my great desire to have gone to Fleet Alley,
God forgive me, again. There I saw it acted. It is true, for want
of practice, they had many of them forgot their parts a little; but
Betterton and my poor Ianthe outdo all the world. There is nothing more
taking in the world with me than that play. Thence to Westminster to my
barber's, and strange to think how when I find that Jervas himself did
intend to bring home my periwigg, and not Jane his maid, I did desire
not to have it at all, for I had a mind to have her bring it home. I
also went to Mr. Blagrave's about speaking to him for his kinswoman to
come live with my wife, but they are not come to town, and so I home
by coach and to my office, and then to supper and to bed. My present
posture is thus: my wife in the country and my mayde Besse with her and
all quiett there. I am endeavouring to find a woman for her to my mind,
and above all one that understands musique, especially singing. I am the
willinger to keepe one because I am in good hopes to get 2 or L300 per
annum extraordinary by the business of the victualling of Tangier, and
yet Mr. Alsopp, my chief hopes, is dead since my looking after it,
and now Mr. Lanyon, I fear, is, falling sicke too. I am pretty well in
health, only subject to wind upon any cold, and then immediate and great
pains. All our discourse is of a Dutch warr and I find it is likely to
come to it, for they are very high and desire not to compliment us at
all, as far as I hear, but to send a good fleete to Guinny to oppose us
there. My Lord Sandwich newly gone to sea, and I, I think, fallen into
his very good opinion again, at least he did before his going, and by
his letter since, show me all manner of respect and confidence. I am
over-joyed in hopes that upon this month's account I shall find myself
worth L1000, besides the rich present of two silver and gilt flaggons
which Mr. Gauden did give me the other day. I do now live very prettily
at home, being most seriously, quietly, and neatly served by my two
mayds Jane and the girle Su, with both of whom I am mightily well
pleased. My greatest trouble is the settling of Brampton Estate, that I
may know what to expect, and how to be able to leave it when I die, so
as to be just to my promise to my uncle Thomas and his son. The next
thing is this cursed trouble my brother Tom is likely to put us to by
his death, forcing us to law with his creditors, among others Dr. Tom
Pepys, and that with some shame as trouble, and the last how to know in
what manner as to saving or spending my father lives, lest they should
run me in debt as one of my uncle's executors, and I never the wiser
nor better for it. But in all this I hope shortly to be at leisure to
consider and inform myself well.

29th. At the office all the morning dispatching of business, at noon
to the 'Change after dinner, and thence to Tom Trice about Dr. Pepys's
business, and thence it raining turned into Fleet Alley, and there was
with Cocke an hour or so. The jade, whether I would not give her money
or not enough; she would not offer to invite to do anything, but on the
contrary saying she had no time, which I was glad of, for I had no mind
to meddle with her, but had my end to see what a cunning jade she was,
to see her impudent tricks and ways of getting money and raising the
reckoning by still calling for things, that it come to 6 or 7 shillings
presently. So away home, glad I escaped without any inconvenience,
and there came Mr. Hill, Andrews and Seignor Pedro, and great store of
musique we had, but I begin to be weary of having a master with us, for
it spoils, methinks, the ingenuity of our practice. After they were
gone comes Mr. Bland to me, sat till 11 at night with me, talking of
the garrison of Tangier and serving them with pieces of eight. A mind he
hath to be employed there, but dares not desire any courtesy of me, and
yet would fain engage me to be for him, for I perceive they do all find
that I am the busy man to see the King have right done him by inquiring
out other bidders. Being quite tired with him, I got him gone, and so to
bed.

30th. All the morning at the office; at noon to the 'Change, where great
talke of a rich present brought by an East India ship from some of the
Princes of India, worth to the King L70,000 in two precious stones.
After dinner to the office, and there all the afternoon making an end
of several things against the end of the month, that I may clear all my
reckonings tomorrow; also this afternoon, with great content, I finished
the contracts for victualling of Tangier with Mr. Lanyon and the rest,
and to my comfort got him and Andrews to sign to the giving me L300 per
annum, by which, at least, I hope to be a L100 or two the better. Wrote
many letters by the post to ease my mind of business and to clear my
paper of minutes, as I did lately oblige myself to clear every thing
against the end of the month. So at night with my mind quiet and
contented to bed. This day I sent a side of venison and six bottles of
wine to Kate Joyce.

31st (Lord's day). Up, and to church, where I have not been these many
weeks. So home, and thither, inviting him yesterday, comes Mr. Hill, at
which I was a little troubled, but made up all very well, carrying him
with me to Sir J. Minnes, where I was invited and all our families to a
venison pasty. Here good cheer and good discourse. After dinner Mr.
Hill and I to my house, and there to musique all the afternoon. He being
gone, in the evening I to my accounts, and to my great joy and with
great thanks to Almighty God, I do find myself most clearly worth L1014,
the first time that ever I was worth L1000 before, which is the height
of all that ever I have for a long time pretended to. But by the
blessing of God upon my care I hope to lay up something more in a little
time, if this business of the victualling of Tangier goes on as I hope
it will. So with praise to God for this state of fortune that I am
brought to as to wealth, and my condition being as I have at large set
it down two days ago in this book, I home to supper and to bed, desiring
God to give me the grace to make good use of what I have and continue my
care and diligence to gain more.




AUGUST 1664

August 1st. Up, my mind very light from my last night's accounts, and so
up and with Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, and Sir W. Pen to St. James's,
where among other things having prepared with some industry every man a
part this morning and no sooner (for fear they should either consider of
it or discourse of it one to another) Mr. Coventry did move the Duke and
obtain it that one of the clerkes of the Clerke of the Acts should have
an addition of L30 a year, as Mr. Turner hath, which I am glad of, that
I may give T. Hater L20 and keep L10 towards a boy's keeping. Thence Mr.
Coventry and I to the Attorney's chamber at the Temple, but not being
there we parted, and I home, and there with great joy told T. Hater what
I had done, with which the poor wretch was very glad, though his modesty
would not suffer him to say much. So to the Coffee-house, and there all
the house full of the victory Generall Soushe

     [General Soushe was Louis Ratuit, Comte de Souches.  The battle was
     fought at Lewenz (or Leva), in Hungary.--B.]

(who is a Frenchman, a soldier of fortune, commanding part of the German
army) hath had against the Turke; killing 4,000 men, and taking most
extraordinary spoil. Thence taking up Harman and his wife, carried them
to Anthony Joyce's, where we had my venison in a pasty well done; but,
Lord! to see how much they made of, it, as if they had never eat any
before, and very merry we were, but Will most troublesomely so, and I
find he and his wife have a most wretched life one with another, but we
took no notice, but were very merry as I could be in such company. But
Mrs. Harman is a very pretty-humoured wretch, whom I could love with all
my heart, being so good and innocent company. Thence to Westminster to
Mr. Blagrave's, and there, after singing a thing or two over, I spoke to
him about a woman for my wife, and he offered me his kinswoman, which I
was glad of, but she is not at present well, but however I hope to have
her. Thence to my Lord Chancellor's, and thence with Mr. Coventry, who
appointed to meet me there, and with him to the Attorney General, and
there with Sir Ph. Warwicke consulted of a new commission to be had
through the Broad Seale to enable us to make this contract for Tangier
victualling. So home, and there talked long with Will about the young
woman of his family which he spoke of for to live with my wife, but
though she hath very many good qualitys, yet being a neighbour's child
and young and not very staid, I dare not venture of having her, because
of her being able to spread any report of our family upon any discontent
among the heart of our neighbours. So that my dependance is upon Mr.
Blagrave, and so home to supper and to bed. Last night, at 12 o'clock,
I was waked with knocking at Sir W. Pen's door; and what was it but
people's running up and down to bring him word that his brother,

     [George Penn, the elder brother of Sir W. Penn, was a wealthy
     merchant at San Lucar, the port of Seville.  He was seized as a
     heretic by the Holy Office, and cast into a dungeon eight feet
     square and dark as the grave.  There he remained three years, every
     month being scourged to make him confess his crimes.  At last, after
     being twice put to the rack, he offered to confess whatever they
     would suggest.  His property, L12,000, was then confiscated, his
     wife, a Catholic, taken from him, and he was banished from Spain for
     ever.--M. B.]

who hath been a good while, it seems, sicke, is dead.

2nd. At the office all the morning. At noon dined, and then to, the
'Change, and there walked two hours or more with Sir W. Warren, who
after much discourse in general of Sir W. Batten's dealings, he fell to
talk how every body must live by their places, and that he was willing,
if I desired it, that I should go shares with him in anything that he
deals in. He told me again and again, too, that he confesses himself
my debtor too for my service and friendship to him in his present great
contract of masts, and that between this and Christmas he shall be in
stocke and will pay it me. This I like well, but do not desire to become
a merchant, and, therefore, put it off, but desired time to think of
it. Thence to the King's play-house, and there saw "Bartholomew Fayre,"
which do still please me; and is, as it is acted, the best comedy in the
world, I believe. I chanced to sit by Tom Killigrew, who tells me
that he is setting up a Nursery; that is, is going to build a house in
Moorefields, wherein he will have common plays acted. But four operas it
shall have in the year, to act six weeks at a time; where we shall
have the best scenes and machines, the best musique, and every thing as
magnificent as is in Christendome; and to that end hath sent for voices
and painters and other persons from Italy. Thence homeward called upon
my Lord Marlborough, and so home and to my office, and then to Sir W.
Pen, and with him and our fellow officers and servants of the house and
none else to Church to lay his brother in the ground, wherein nothing
handsome at all, but that he lays him under the Communion table in the
chancel, about nine at night? So home and to bed.

3rd. Up betimes and set some joyners on work to new lay my floor in our
wardrobe, which I intend to make a room for musique. Thence abroad to
Westminster, among other things to Mr. Blagrave's, and there had his
consent for his kinswoman to come to be with my wife for her woman, at
which I am well pleased and hope she may do well. Thence to White Hall
to meet with Sir G. Carteret about hiring some ground to make our mast
docke at Deptford, but being Council morning failed, but met with Mr.
Coventry, and he and I discoursed of the likeliness of a Dutch warr,
which I think is very likely now, for the Dutch do prepare a fleet to
oppose us at Guinny, and he do think we shall, though neither of us have
a mind to it, fall into it of a sudden, and yet the plague do increase
among them, and is got into their fleet, and Opdam's own ship, which
makes it strange they should be so high. Thence to the 'Change, and
thence home to dinner, and down by water to Woolwich to the rope yard,
and there visited Mrs. Falconer, who tells me odd stories of how Sir W.
Pen was rewarded by her husband with a gold watch (but seems not certain
of what Sir W. Batten told me, of his daughter having a life given her
in L80 per ann.) for his helping him to his place, and yet cost him L150
to Mr. Coventry besides. He did much advise it seems Mr. Falconer not
to marry again, expressing that he would have him make his daughter his
heire, or words to that purpose, and that that makes him, she thinks, so
cold in giving her any satisfaction, and that W. Boddam hath publickly
said, since he came down thither to be clerke of the ropeyard, that it
hath this week cost him L100, and would be glad that it would cost him
but half as much more for the place, and that he was better before than
now, and that if he had been to have bought it, he would not have given
so much for it. Now I am sure that Mr. Coventry hath again and again
said that he would take nothing, but would give all his part in it
freely to him, that so the widow might have something. What the meaning
of this is I know not, but that Sir W. Pen do get something by
it. Thence to the Dockeyard, and there saw the new ship in great
forwardness. So home and to supper, and then to the office, where late,
Mr. Bland and I talking about Tangier business, and so home to bed.

4th. Up betimes and to the office, fitting myself against a great
dispute about the East India Company, which spent afterwards with us all
the morning. At noon dined with Sir W. Pen, a piece of beef only, and I
counterfeited a friendship and mirth which I cannot have with him, yet
out with him by his coach, and he did carry me to a play and pay for me
at the King's house, which is "The Rivall Ladys," a very innocent and
most pretty witty play. I was much pleased with it, and it being given
me, I look upon it as no breach to my oathe. Here we hear that Clun, one
of their best actors, was, the last night, going out of towne (after he
had acted the Alchymist, wherein was one of his best parts that he acts)
to his country-house, set upon and murdered; one of the rogues taken, an
Irish fellow. It seems most cruelly butchered and bound. The house will
have a great miss of him. Thence visited my Lady Sandwich, who tells me
my Lord FitzHarding is to be made a Marquis. Thence home to my office
late, and so to supper and to bed.

5th. Up very betimes and set my plaisterer to work about whiting and
colouring my musique roome, which having with great pleasure seen done,
about ten o'clock I dressed myself, and so mounted upon a very pretty
mare, sent me by Sir W. Warren, according to his promise yesterday. And
so through the City, not a little proud, God knows, to be seen upon so
pretty a beast, and to my cozen W. Joyce's, who presently mounted too,
and he and I out of towne toward Highgate; in the way, at Kentish-towne,
showing me the place and manner of Clun's being killed and laid in a
ditch, and yet was not killed by any wounds, having only one in his arm,
but bled to death through his struggling. He told me, also, the manner
of it, of his going home so late [from] drinking with his whore, and
manner of having it found out. Thence forward to Barnett, and there
drank, and so by night to Stevenage, it raining a little, but not much,
and there to my great trouble, find that my wife was not come, nor any
Stamford coach gone down this week, so that she cannot come. So vexed
and weary, and not thoroughly out of pain neither in my old parts, I
after supper to bed, and after a little sleep, W. Joyce comes in his
shirt into my chamber, with a note and a messenger from my wife, that
she was come by Yorke coach to Bigglesworth, and would be with us
to-morrow morning. So, mightily pleased at her discreete action in this
business, I with peace to sleep again till next morning. So up, and

6th. Here lay Deane Honiwood last night. I met and talked with him this
morning, and a simple priest he is, though a good, well-meaning man. W.
Joyce and I to a game at bowles on the green there till eight o'clock,
and then comes my wife in the coach, and a coach full of women, only one
man riding by, gone down last night to meet a sister of his coming to
town. So very joyful drank there, not 'lighting, and we mounted and away
with them to Welling, and there 'light, and dined very well and merry
and glad to see my poor-wife. Here very merry as being weary I could be,
and after dinner, out again, and to London. In our way all the way the
mightiest merry, at a couple of young gentlemen, come down to meet the
same gentlewoman, that ever I was in my life, and so W. Joyce too, to
see how one of them was horsed upon a hard-trotting sorrell horse, and
both of them soundly weary and galled. But it is not to be set down how
merry we were all the way. We 'light in Holborne, and by another coach
my wife and mayde home, and I by horseback, and found all things well
and most mighty neate and clean. So, after welcoming my wife a little,
to the office, and so home to supper, and then weary and not very well
to bed.

7th (Lord's day). Lay long caressing my wife and talking, she telling me
sad stories of the ill, improvident, disquiett, and sluttish manner that
my father and mother and Pall live in the country, which troubles me
mightily, and I must seek to remedy it. So up and ready, and my wife
also, and then down and I showed my wife, to her great admiration and
joy, Mr. Gauden's present of plate, the two flaggons, which indeed are
so noble that I hardly can think that they are yet mine. So blessing God
for it, we down to dinner mighty pleasant, and so up after dinner for a
while, and I then to White Hall, walked thither, having at home met with
a letter of Captain Cooke's, with which he had sent a boy for me to see,
whom he did intend to recommend to me. I therefore went and there met
and spoke with him. He gives me great hopes of the boy, which pleases
me, and at Chappell I there met Mr. Blagrave, who gives a report of the
boy, and he showed me him, and I spoke to him, and the boy seems a good
willing boy to come to me, and I hope will do well. I am to speak to
Mr. Townsend to hasten his clothes for him, and then he is to come. So I
walked homeward and met with Mr. Spong, and he with me as far as the
Old Exchange talking of many ingenuous things, musique, and at last of
glasses, and I find him still the same ingenuous man that ever he was,
and do among other fine things tell me that by his microscope of his
owne making he do discover that the wings of a moth is made just as the
feathers of the wing of a bird, and that most plainly and certainly.
While we were talking came by several poor creatures carried by, by
constables, for being at a conventicle. They go like lambs, without any
resistance. I would to God they would either conform, or be more wise,
and not be catched! Thence parted with him, mightily pleased with his
company, and away homeward, calling at Dan Rawlinson, and supped there
with my uncle Wight, and then home and eat again for form sake with her,
and then to prayers and to bed.

8th. Up and abroad with Sir W. Batten, by coach to St. James's, where
by the way he did tell me how Sir J. Minnes would many times arrogate
to himself the doing of that that all the Board have equal share in,
and more that to himself which he hath had nothing to do in, and
particularly the late paper given in by him to the Duke, the translation
of a Dutch print concerning the quarrel between us and them, which he
did give as his own when it was Sir Richard Ford's wholly. Also he told
me how Sir W. Pen (it falling in our discourse touching Mrs. Falconer)
was at first very great for Mr. Coventry to bring him in guests, and
that at high rates for places, and very open was he to me therein. After
business done with the Duke, I home to the Coffee-house, and so home to
dinner, and after dinner to hang up my fine pictures in my dining room,
which makes it very pretty, and so my wife and I abroad to the King's
play-house, she giving me her time of the last month, she having not
seen any then; so my vowe is not broke at all, it costing me no more
money than it would have done upon her, had she gone both her times that
were due to her. Here we saw "Flora's Figarys." I never saw it before,
and by the most ingenuous performance of the young jade Flora, it seemed
as pretty a pleasant play as ever I saw in my life. So home to supper,
and then to my office late, Mr. Andrews and I to talk about our
victualling commission, and then he being gone I to set down my four
days past journalls and expenses, and so home to bed.

9th. Up, and to my office, and there we sat all the morning, at noon
home, and there by appointment Mr. Blagrave came and dined with me, and
brought a friend of his of the Chappell with him. Very merry at dinner,
and then up to my chamber and there we sung a Psalm or two of Lawes's,
then he and I a little talke by ourselves of his kinswoman that is to
come to live with my wife, who is to come about ten days hence, and I
hope will do well. They gone I to my office, and there my head being a
little troubled with the little wine I drank, though mixed with beer,
but it may be a little more than I used to do, and yet I cannot say so,
I went home and spent the afternoon with my wife talking, and then in
the evening a little to my office, and so home to supper and to bed.
This day comes the newes that the Emperour hath beat the Turke;

     [This was the battle of St. Gothard, in which the Turks were
     defeated with great slaughter by the imperial forces under
     Montecuculli, assisted by the confederates from the Rhine, and by
     forty troops of French cavalry under Coligni.  St. Gothard is in
     Hungary, on the river Raab, near the frontier of Styria; it is about
     one hundred and twenty miles south of Vienna, and thirty east of
     Gratz.  The battle took place on the 9th Moharrem, A.H. 1075, or
     23rd July, A.D. 1664 (old style), which is that used by Pepys.--B.]

killed the Grand Vizier and several great Bassas, with an army of 80,000
men killed and routed; with some considerable loss of his own side,
having lost three generals, and the French forces all cut off almost.
Which is thought as good a service to the Emperour as beating the Turke
almost, for had they conquered they would have been as troublesome to
him.

     [The fact is, the Germans were beaten by the Turks, and the French
     won the battle for them.--B.]

10th. Up, and, being ready, abroad to do several small businesses, among
others to find out one to engrave my tables upon my new sliding rule
with silver plates, it being so small that Browne that made it cannot
get one to do it. So I find out Cocker, the famous writing-master, and
get him to do it, and I set an hour by him to see him design it all; and
strange it is to see him with his natural eyes to cut so small at his
first designing it, and read it all over, without any missing, when for
my life I could not, with my best skill, read one word or letter of it;
but it is use. But he says that the best light for his life to do a very
small thing by (contrary to Chaucer's words to the Sun, "that he should
lend his light to them that small seals grave"), it should be by an
artificial light of a candle, set to advantage, as he could do it.
I find the fellow, by his discourse, very ingenuous; and among other
things, a great admirer and well read in all our English poets, and
undertakes to judge of them all, and that not impertinently. Well
pleased with his company and better with his judgement upon my Rule, I
left him and home, whither Mr. Deane by agreement came to me and dined
with me, and by chance Gunner Batters's wife. After dinner Deane and I
[had] great discourse again about my Lord Chancellor's timber, out of
which I wish I may get well. Thence I to Cocker's again, and sat by him
with good discourse again for an hour or two, and then left him, and
by agreement with Captain Silas Taylor (my old acquaintance at the
Exchequer) to the Post Officer to hear some instrument musique of Mr.
Berchenshaw's before my Lord Brunkard and Sir Robert Murray. I must
confess, whether it be that I hear it but seldom, or that really voice
is better, but so it is that I found no pleasure at all in it, and
methought two voyces were worth twenty of it. So home to my office a
while, and then to supper and to bed.

11th. Up, and through pain, to my great grief forced to wear my gowne
to keep my legs warm. At the office all the morning, and there a high
dispute against Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen about the breadth of canvas
again, they being for the making of it narrower, I and Mr. Coventry and
Sir J. Minnes for the keeping it broader. So home to dinner, and by and
by comes Mr. Creed, lately come from the Downes, and dined with me. I
show him a good countenance, but love him not for his base ingratitude
to me. However, abroad, carried my wife to buy things at the New
Exchange, and so to my Lady Sandwich's, and there merry, talking with
her a great while, and so home, whither comes Cocker with my rule, which
he hath engraved to admiration, for goodness and smallness of work: it
cost me 14s. the doing, and mightily pleased I am with it. By and by, he
gone, comes Mr. Moore and staid talking with me a great while about
my Lord's businesses, which I fear will be in a bad condition for his
family if my Lord should miscarry at sea. He gone, I late to my office,
and cannot forbear admiring and consulting my new rule, and so home to
supper and to bed. This day, for a wager before the King, my Lords of
Castlehaven and Arran (a son of my Lord of Ormond's), they two alone did
run down and kill a stoute bucke in St. James's parke.

12th. Up, and all the morning busy at the office with Sir W. Warren
about a great contract for New England masts, where I was very hard with
him, even to the making him angry, but I thought it fit to do it as well
as just for my owne [and] the King's behalf. At noon to the 'Change
a little, and so to dinner and then out by coach, setting my wife and
mayde down, going to Stevens the silversmith to change some old silver
lace and to go buy new silke lace for a petticoat; I to White Hall and
did much business at a Tangier Committee; where, among other things,
speaking about propriety of the houses there, and how we ought to let
the Portugeses I have right done them, as many of them as continue, or
did sell the houses while they were in possession, and something further
in their favour, the Duke in an anger I never observed in him before,
did cry, says he, "All the world rides us, and I think we shall never
ride anybody." Thence home, and, though late, yet Pedro being there, he
sang a song and parted. I did give him 5s., but find it burdensome and
so will break up the meeting. At night is brought home our poor Fancy,
which to my great grief continues lame still, so that I wish she had not
been brought ever home again, for it troubles me to see her.

13th. Up, and before I went to the office comes my Taylor with a coate
I have made to wear within doors, purposely to come no lower than my
knees, for by my wearing a gowne within doors comes all my tenderness
about my legs. There comes also Mr. Reeve, with a microscope and
scotoscope.

     [An optical instrument used to enable objects to be seen in the
     dark.  The name is derived from the Greek.]

For the first I did give him L5 10s., a great price, but a most curious
bauble it is, and he says, as good, nay, the best he knows in England,
and he makes the best in the world. The other he gives me, and is of
value; and a curious curiosity it is to look objects in a darke room
with. Mightly pleased with this I to the office, where all the morning.
There offered by Sir W. Pen his coach to go to Epsum and carry my wife,
I stept out and bade my wife make her ready, but being not very well and
other things advising me to the contrary, I did forbear going, and so
Mr. Creed dining with me I got him to give my wife and me a play this
afternoon, lending him money to do it, which is a fallacy that I have
found now once, to avoyde my vowe with, but never to be more practised I
swear, and to the new play, at the Duke's house, of "Henry the Fifth;" a
most noble play, writ by my Lord Orrery; wherein Betterton, Harris, and
Ianthe's parts are most incomparably wrote and done, and the whole
play the most full of height and raptures of wit and sense, that ever
I heard; having but one incongruity, or what did, not please me in it,
that is, that King Harry promises to plead for Tudor to their Mistresse,
Princesse Katherine of France, more than when it comes to it he seems
to do; and Tudor refused by her with some kind of indignity, not with a
difficulty and honour that it ought to have been done in to him. Thence
home and to my office, wrote by the post, and then to read a little in
Dr. Power's book of discovery by the Microscope to enable me a little
how to use and what to expect from my glasse. So to supper and to bed.

14th (Lord's day). After long lying discoursing with my wife, I up,
and comes Mr. Holliard to see me, who concurs with me that my pain is
nothing but cold in my legs breeding wind, and got only by my using to
wear a gowne, and that I am not at all troubled with any ulcer, but my
thickness of water comes from my overheat in my back. He gone, comes Mr.
Herbert, Mr. Honiwood's man, and dined with me, a very honest, plain,
well-meaning man, I think him to be; and by his discourse and manner of
life, the true embleme of an old ordinary serving-man. After dinner up
to my chamber and made an end of Dr. Power's booke of the Microscope,
very fine and to my content, and then my wife and I with great pleasure,
but with great difficulty before we could come to find the manner of
seeing any thing by my microscope. At last did with good content, though
not so much as I expect when I come to understand it better. By and by
comes W. Joyce, in his silke suit, and cloake lined with velvett:
staid talking with me, and I very merry at it. He supped with me; but a
cunning, crafty fellow he is, and dangerous to displease, for his tongue
spares nobody. After supper I up to read a little, and then to bed.

15th. Up, and with Sir J. Minnes by coach to St. James's, and there did
our business with the Duke, who tells us more and more signs of a Dutch
warr, and how we must presently set out a fleete for Guinny, for the
Dutch are doing so, and there I believe the warr will begin. Thence home
with him again, in our way he talking of his cures abroad, while he was
with the King as a doctor, and above all men the pox. And among others,
Sir J. Denham he told me he had cured, after it was come to an ulcer
all over his face, to a miracle. To the Coffee-house I, and so to the
'Change a little, and then home to dinner with Creed, whom I met at the
Coffee-house, and after dinner by coach set him down at the Temple, and
I and my wife to Mr. Blagrave's. They being none of them at home; I to
the Hall, leaving her there, and thence to the Trumpett, whither came
Mrs. Lane, and there begins a sad story how her husband, as I feared,
proves not worth a farthing, and that she is with child and undone, if I
do not get him a place. I had my pleasure here of her, and she, like an
impudent jade, depends upon my kindness to her husband, but I will have
no more to do with her, let her brew as she has baked, seeing she would
not take my counsel about Hawly. After drinking we parted, and I to
Blagrave's, and there discoursed with Mrs. Blagrave about her kinswoman,
who it seems is sickly even to frantiqueness sometimes, and among
other things chiefly from love and melancholy upon the death of her
servant,--[Servant = lover.]--insomuch that she telling us all most
simply and innocently I fear she will not be able to come to us with any
pleasure, which I am sorry for, for I think she would have pleased us
very well. In comes he, and so to sing a song and his niece with us,
but she sings very meanly. So through the Hall and thence by coach home,
calling by the way at Charing Crosse, and there saw the great Dutchman
that is come over, under whose arm I went with my hat on, and could not
reach higher than his eye-browes with the tip of my fingers, reaching as
high as I could. He is a comely and well-made man, and his wife a very
little, but pretty comely Dutch woman. It is true, he wears pretty
high-heeled shoes, but not very high, and do generally wear a turbant,
which makes him show yet taller than really he is, though he is very
tall, as I have said before. Home to my office, and then to supper, and
then to my office again late, and so home to bed, my wife and I troubled
that we do not speed better in this business of her woman.

16th. Wakened about two o'clock this morning with the noise of thunder,
which lasted for an houre, with such continued lightnings, not flashes,
but flames, that all the sky and ayre was light; and that for a great
while, not a minute's space between new flames all the time; such a
thing as I never did see, nor could have believed had ever been in
nature. And being put into a great sweat with it, could not sleep till
all was over. And that accompanied with such a storm of rain as I never
heard in my life. I expected to find my house in the morning overflowed
with the rain breaking in, and that much hurt must needs have been done
in the city with this lightning; but I find not one drop of rain in my
house, nor any newes of hurt done. But it seems it has been here and
all up and down the countrie hereabouts the like tempest, Sir W. Batten
saying much of the greatness thereof at Epsum. Up and all the morning at
the office. At noon busy at the 'Change about one business or other, and
thence home to dinner, and so to my office all the afternoon very busy,
and so to supper anon, and then to my office again a while, collecting
observations out of Dr. Power's booke of Microscopes, and so home to
bed, very stormy weather to-night for winde. This day we had newes that
my Lady Pen is landed and coming hither, so that I hope the family will
be in better order and more neate than it hath been.

17th. Up, and going to Sir W. Batten to speak to him about business,
he did give me three, bottles of his Epsum water, which I drank and
it wrought well with me, and did give me many good stools, and I found
myself mightily cooled with them and refreshed. Thence I to Mr. Honiwood
and my father's old house, but he was gone out, and there I staid
talking with his man Herbert, who tells me how Langford and his wife are
very foul-mouthed people, and will speak very ill of my father, calling
him old rogue in reference to the hard penniworths he sold him of his
goods when the rogue need not have bought any of them. So that I am
resolved he shall get no more money by me, but it vexes me to think that
my father should be said to go away in debt himself, but that I will
cause to be remedied whatever comes of it. Thence to my Lord Crew, and
there with him a little while. Before dinner talked of the Dutch war,
and find that he do much doubt that we shall fall into it without the
money or consent of Parliament, that is expected or the reason of it
that is fit to have for every warr. Dined with him, and after dinner
talked with Sir Thomas Crew, who told me how Mr. Edward Montagu is
for ever blown up, and now quite out with his father again; to whom
he pretended that his going down was, not that he was cast out of the
Court, but that he had leave to be absent a month; but now he finds the
truth. Thence to my Lady Sandwich, where by agreement my wife dined, and
after talking with her I carried my wife to Mr. Pierce's and left her
there, and so to Captain Cooke's, but he was not at home, but I there
spoke with my boy Tom Edwards, and directed him to go to Mr. Townsend
(with whom I was in the morning) to have measure taken of his clothes to
be made him there out of the Wardrobe, which will be so done, and then
I think he will come to me. Thence to White Hall, and after long staying
there was no Committee of the Fishery as was expected. Here I walked
long with Mr. Pierce, who tells me the King do still sup every night
with my Lady Castlemayne, who he believes has lately slunk a great belly
away, for from very big she is come to be down again. Thence to Mrs.
Pierce's, and with her and my wife to see Mrs. Clarke, where with him
and her very merry discoursing of the late play of Henry the 5th, which
they conclude the best that ever was made, but confess with me that
Tudor's being dismissed in the manner he is is a great blemish to the
play. I am mightily pleased with the Doctor, for he is the only man I
know that I could learn to pronounce by, which he do the best that ever
I heard any man. Thence home and to the office late, and so to supper
and to bed. My Lady Pen came hither first to-night to Sir W. Pen's
lodgings.

18th. Lay too long in bed, till 8 o'clock, then up and Mr. Reeve came
and brought an anchor and a very fair loadstone. He would have had me
bought it, and a good stone it is, but when he saw that I would not
buy it he said he [would] leave it for me to sell for him. By and by he
comes to tell me that he had present occasion for L6 to make up a sum,
and that he would pay me in a day or two, but I had the unusual wit to
deny him, and so by and by we parted, and I to the office, where busy
all the morning sitting. Dined alone at home, my wife going to-day to
dine with Mrs. Pierce, and thence with her and Mrs. Clerke to see a new
play, "The Court Secret." I busy all the afternoon, toward evening
to Westminster, and there in the Hall a while, and then to my barber,
willing to have any opportunity to speak to Jane, but wanted it. So to
Mrs. Pierces, who was come home, and she and Mrs. Clerke busy at cards,
so my wife being gone home, I home, calling by the way at the Wardrobe
and met Mr. Townsend, Mr. Moore and others at the Taverne thereby, and
thither I to them and spoke with Mr. Townsend about my boy's clothes,
which he says shall be soon done, and then I hope I shall be settled
when I have one in the house that is musicall. So home and to supper,
and then a little to my office, and then home to bed. My wife says the
play she saw is the worst that ever she saw in her life.

19th. Up and to the office, where Mr. Coventry and Sir W. Pen and I sat
all the morning hiring of ships to go to Guinny, where we believe the
warr with Holland will first break out. At noon dined at home, and after
dinner my wife and I to Sir W. Pen's, to see his Lady, the first time,
who is a well-looked, fat, short, old Dutchwoman, but one that hath been
heretofore pretty handsome, and is now very discreet, and, I believe,
hath more wit than her husband. Here we staid talking a good while, and
very well pleased I was with the old woman at first visit. So away home,
and I to my office, my wife to go see my aunt Wight, newly come to town.
Creed came to me, and he and I out, among other things, to look out a
man to make a case, for to keep my stone, that I was cut of, in, and he
to buy Daniel's history, which he did, but I missed of my end. So parted
upon Ludgate Hill, and I home and to the office, where busy till supper,
and home to supper to a good dish of fritters, which I bespoke, and were
done much to my mind. Then to the office a while again, and so home
to bed. The newes of the Emperour's victory over the Turkes is by some
doubted, but by most confessed to be very small (though great) of what
was talked, which was 80,000 men to be killed and taken of the Turke's
side.

20th. Up and to the office a while, but this day the Parliament meeting
only to be adjourned to November (which was done, accordingly), we did
not meet, and so I forth to bespeak a case to be made to keep my stone
in, which will cost me 25s. Thence I walked to Cheapside, there to see
the effect of a fire there this morning, since four o'clock; which I
find in the house of Mr. Bois, that married Dr. Fuller's niece, who are
both out of towne, leaving only a mayde and man in towne. It begun in
their house, and hath burned much and many houses backward, though none
forward; and that in the great uniform pile of buildings in the middle
of Cheapside. I am very sorry for them, for the Doctor's sake. Thence
to the 'Change, and so home to dinner. And thence to Sir W. Batten's,
whither Sir Richard Ford came, the Sheriffe, who hath been at this fire
all the while; and he tells me, upon my question, that he and the Mayor
were there, as it is their dutys to be, not only to keep the peace, but
they have power of commanding the pulling down of any house or houses,
to defend the whole City. By and by comes in the Common Cryer of the
City to speak with him; and when he was gone, says he, "You may see
by this man the constitution of the Magistracy of this City; that this
fellow's place, I dare give him (if he will be true to me) L1000 for
his profits every year, and expect to get L500 more to myself thereby.
When," says he, "I in myself am forced to spend many times as much." By
and by came Mr. Coventry, and so we met at the office, to hire ships for
Guinny, and that done broke up. I to Sir W. Batten's, there to discourse
with Mrs. Falconer, who hath been with Sir W. Pen this evening, after
Mr. Coventry had promised her half what W. Bodham had given him for his
place, but Sir W. Pen, though he knows that, and that Mr. Bodham hath
said that his place hath cost him L100 and would L100 more, yet is he
so high against the poor woman that he will not hear to give her a
farthing, but it seems do listen after a lease where he expects Mr.
Falconer hath put in his daughter's life, and he is afraid that that is
not done, and did tell Mrs. Falconer that he would see it and know what
is done therein in spite of her, when, poor wretch, she neither do nor
can hinder him the knowing it. Mr. Coventry knows of this business of
the lease, and I believe do think of it as well as I. But the poor woman
is gone home without any hope, but only Mr. Coventry's own nobleness. So
I to my office and wrote many letters, and so to supper and to bed.

21st (Lord's day). Waked about 4 o'clock with my wife, having a
looseness, and peoples coming in the yard to the pump to draw water
several times, so that fear of this day's fire made me fearful, and
called Besse and sent her down to see, and it was Griffin's maid for
water to wash her house. So to sleep again, and then lay talking till
9 o'clock. So up and drunk three bottles of Epsum water, which wrought
well with me. I all the morning and most of the afternoon after dinner
putting papers to rights in my chamber, and the like in the evening till
night at my office, and renewing and writing fair over my vowes. So home
to supper, prayers, and to bed. Mr. Coventry told us the Duke was gone
ill of a fit of an ague to bed; so we sent this morning to see how he
do.

     [Elizabeth Falkener, wife of John Falkener, announced to Pepys the
     death of "her dear and loving husband" in a letter dated July 19th,
     1664 "begs interest that she may be in something considered by the
     person succeeding her husband in his employment, which has
     occasioned great expenses." ("Calendar of State Papers," Domestic,
     1663-64, p. 646)]

22nd. Up and abroad, doing very many errands to my great content which
lay as burdens upon my mind and memory. Home to dinner, and so to
White Hall, setting down my wife at her father's, and I to the Tangier
Committee, where several businesses I did to my mind, and with hopes
thereby to get something. So to Westminster Hall, where by appointment
I had made I met with Dr. Tom Pepys, but avoided all discourse of
difference with him, though much against my will, and he like a doating
coxcomb as he is, said he could not but demand his money, and that he
would have his right, and that let all anger be forgot, and such sorry
stuff, nothing to my mind, but only I obtained this satisfaction, that
he told me about Sturbridge last was 12 months or 2 years he was at
Brampton, and there my father did tell him that what he had done for my
brother in giving him his goods and setting him up as he had done was
upon condition that he should give my brother John L20 per ann., which
he charged upon my father, he tells me in answer, as a great deal of
hard measure that he should expect that with him that had a brother so
able as I am to do that for him. This is all that he says he can say as
to my father's acknowledging that he had given Tom his goods. He says
his brother Roger will take his oath that my father hath given him
thanks for his counsel for his giving of Tom his goods and setting him
up in the manner that he hath done, but the former part of this he did
not speak fully so bad nor as certain what he could say. So we walked
together to my cozen Joyce's, where my wife staid for me, and then I
home and her by coach, and so to my office, then to supper and to bed.

23rd. Lay long talking with my wife, and angry awhile about her desiring
to have a French mayde all of a sudden, which I took to arise from
yesterday's being with her mother. But that went over and friends again,
and so she be well qualitied, I care not much whether she be French or
no, so a Protestant. Thence to the office, and at noon to the 'Change,
where very busy getting ships for Guinny and for Tangier. So home to
dinner, and then abroad all the afternoon doing several errands, to
comply with my oath of ending many businesses before Bartholomew's day,
which is two days hence. Among others I went into New Bridewell, in my
way to Mr. Cole, and there I saw the new model, and it is very handsome.
Several at work, among others, one pretty whore brought in last night,
which works very lazily. I did give them 6d. to drink, and so away. To
Graye's Inn, but missed Mr. Cole, and so homeward called at Harman's,
and there bespoke some chairs for a room, and so home, and busy late,
and then to supper and to bed. The Dutch East India Fleete are now
come home safe, which we are sorry for. Our Fleets on both sides are
hastening out to Guinny.

24th. Up by six o'clock, and to my office with Tom Hater dispatching
business in haste. At nine o'clock to White Hall about Mr. Maes's
business at the Council, which stands in an ill condition still. Thence
to Graye's Inn, but missed of Mr. Cole the lawyer, and so walked home,
calling among the joyners in Wood Streete to buy a table and bade in
many places, but did not buy it till I come home to see the place where
it is to stand, to judge how big it must be. So after 'Change home and a
good dinner, and then to White Hall to a Committee of the Fishery, where
my Lord Craven and Mr. Gray mightily against Mr. Creed's being joined
in the warrant for Secretary with Mr. Duke. However I did get it put
off till the Duke of Yorke was there, and so broke up doing nothing. So
walked home, first to the Wardrobe, and there saw one suit of clothes
made for my boy and linen set out, and I think to have him the latter
end of this week, and so home, Mr. Creed walking the greatest part
of the way with me advising what to do in his case about his being
Secretary to us in conjunction with Duke, which I did give him the best
I could, and so home and to my office, where very much business, and
then home to supper and to bed.

25th. Up and to the office after I had spoke to my taylor, Langford (who
came to me about some work), desiring to know whether he knew of any
debts that my father did owe of his own in the City. He tells me, "No,
not any." I did on purpose try him because of what words he and his wife
have said of him (as Herbert told me the other day), and further did
desire him, that if he knew of any or could hear of any that he should
bid them come to me, and I would pay them, for I would not that because
he do not pay my brother's debts that therefore he should be thought
to deny the payment of his owne. All the morning at the office busy. At
noon to the 'Change, among other things busy to get a little by the hire
of a ship for Tangier. So home to dinner, and after dinner comes
Mr. Cooke to see me; it is true he was kind to me at sea in carrying
messages to and fro to my wife from sea, but I did do him kindnesses
too, and therefore I matter not much to compliment or make any regard
of his thinking me to slight him as I do for his folly about my brother
Tom's mistress. After dinner and some talk with him, I to my office;
there busy, till by and by Jacke Noble came to me to tell me that he had
Cave in prison, and that he would give me and my father good security
that neither we nor any of our family should be troubled with the child;
for he could prove that he was fully satisfied for him; and that if the
worst came to the worst, the parish must keep it; that Cave did bring
the child to his house, but they got it carried back again, and that
thereupon he put him in prison. When he saw that I would not pay him
the money, nor made anything of being secured against the child, he then
said that then he must go to law, not himself, but come in as a witness
for Cave against us. I could have told him that he could bear witness
that Cave is satisfied, or else there is no money due to himself; but
I let alone any such discourse, only getting as much out of him as I
could. I perceive he is a rogue, and hath inquired into everything and
consulted with Dr. Pepys, and that he thinks as Dr. Pepys told him that
my father if he could would not pay a farthing of the debts, and yet I
made him confess that in all his lifetime he never knew my father to be
asked for money twice, nay, not once, all the time he lived with him,
and that for his own debts he believed he would do so still, but he
meant only for those of Tom. He said now that Randall and his wife and
the midwife could prove from my brother's own mouth that the child was
his, and that Tom had told them the circumstances of time, upon November
5th at night, that he got it on her. I offered him if he would secure
my father against being forced to pay the money again I would pay him,
which at first he would do, give his own security, and when I asked more
than his own he told me yes he would, and those able men, subsidy men,
but when we came by and by to discourse of it again he would not then do
it, but said he would take his course, and joyne with Cave and release
him, and so we parted. However, this vexed me so as I could not be
quiet, but took coach to go speak with Mr. Cole, but met him not within,
so back, buying a table by the way, and at my office late, and then home
to supper and to bed, my mind disordered about this roguish business--in
every thing else, I thank God, well at ease.

26th. Up by 5 o'clock, which I have not been many a day, and down by
water to Deptford, and there took in Mr. Pumpfield the rope-maker, and
down with him to Woolwich to view Clothier's cordage, which I found bad
and stopped the receipt of it. Thence to the ropeyard, and there among
other things discoursed with Mrs. Falconer, who tells me that she has
found the writing, and Sir W. Pen's daughter is not put into the
lease for her life as he expected, and I am glad of it. Thence to the
Dockyarde, and there saw the new ship in very great forwardness, and so
by water to Deptford a little, and so home and shifting myself, to the
'Change, and there did business, and thence down by water to White Hall,
by the way, at the Three Cranes, putting into an alehouse and eat a bit
of bread and cheese. There I could not get into the Parke, and so was
fain to stay in the gallery over the gate to look to the passage into
the Parke, into which the King hath forbid of late anybody's coming, to
watch his coming that had appointed me to come, which he did by and by
with his lady and went to Guardener's Lane, and there instead of meeting
with one that was handsome and could play well, as they told me, she is
the ugliest beast and plays so basely as I never heard anybody, so that
I should loathe her being in my house. However, she took us by and by
and showed us indeed some pictures at one Hiseman's, a picture drawer, a
Dutchman, which is said to exceed Lilly, and indeed there is both of
the Queenes and Mayds of Honour (particularly Mrs. Stewart's in a buff
doublet like a soldier) as good pictures, I think, as ever I saw.
The Queene is drawn in one like a shepherdess, in the other like St.
Katharin, most like and most admirably. I was mightily pleased with this
sight indeed, and so back again to their lodgings, where I left them,
but before I went this mare that carried me, whose name I know not but
that they call him Sir John, a pitiful fellow, whose face I have long
known but upon what score I know not, but he could have the confidence
to ask me to lay down money for him to renew the lease of his house,
which I did give eare to there because I was there receiving a civility
from him, but shall not part with my money. There I left them, and I by
water home, where at my office busy late, then home to supper, and so to
bed. This day my wife tells me Mr. Pen,

     [William Penn, afterwards the famous Quaker.  P. Gibson, writing to
     him in March, 1711-12, says: "I remember your honour very well,
     when you newly came out of France and wore pantaloon breeches"]

Sir William's son, is come back from France, and come to visit her. A
most modish person, grown, she says, a fine gentleman.

27th. Up and to the office, where all the morning. At noon to the
'Change, and there almost made my bargain about a ship for Tangier,
which will bring me in a little profit with Captain Taylor. Off the
'Change with Mr. Cutler and Sir W. Rider to Cutler's house, and there
had a very good dinner, and two or three pretty young ladies of their
relations there. Thence to my case-maker for my stone case, and had it
to my mind, and cost me 24s., which is a great deale of money, but it is
well done and pleases me. So doing some other small errands I home, and
there find my boy, Tom Edwards, come, sent me by Captain Cooke, having
been bred in the King's Chappell these four years. I propose to make a
clerke of him, and if he deserves well, to do well by him. Spent much
of the afternoon to set his chamber in order, and then to the office
leaving him at home, and late at night after all business was done I
called Will and told him my reason of taking a boy, and that it is
of necessity, not out of any unkindness to him, nor should be to his
injury, and then talked about his landlord's daughter to come to my
wife, and I think it will be. So home and find my boy a very schoole
boy, that talks innocently and impertinently, but at present it is a
sport to us, and in a little time he will leave it. So sent him to bed,
he saying that he used to go to bed at eight o'clock, and then all of
us to bed, myself pretty well pleased with my choice of a boy. All the
newes this day is, that the Dutch are, with twenty-two sayle of ships
of warr, crewsing up and down about Ostend; at which we are alarmed. My
Lord Sandwich is come back into the Downes with only eight sayle,
which is or may be a prey to the Dutch, if they knew our weakness and
inability to set out any more speedily.

28th (Lord's day). Up the first time I have had great while. Home to
dined, and with my boy alone to church anybody to attend me to church a
dinner, and there met Creed, who, and we merry together, as his learning
is such and judgment that I cannot but be pleased with it. After dinner
I took him to church, into our gallery, with me, but slept the best part
of the sermon, which was a most silly one. So he and I to walk to the
'Change a while, talking from one pleasant discourse to another, and
so home, and thither came my uncle Wight and aunt, and supped with us
mighty merry. And Creed lay with us all night, and so to bed, very merry
to think how Mr. Holliard (who came in this evening to see me) makes
nothing, but proving as a most clear thing that Rome is Antichrist.

29th. Up betimes, intending to do business at my office, by 5 o'clock,
but going out met at my door Mr. Hughes come to speak with me about
office business, and told me that as he came this morning from Deptford
he left the King's yarde a-fire. So I presently took a boat and down,
and there found, by God's providence, the fire out; but if there had
been any wind it must have burned all our stores, which is a most
dreadfull consideration. But leaving all things well I home, and out
abroad doing many errands, Mr. Creed also out, and my wife to her
mother's, and Creed and I met at my Lady Sandwich's and there dined; but
my Lady is become as handsome, I think, as ever she was; and so good and
discreet a woman I know not in the world. After dinner I to Westminster
to Jervas's a while, and so doing many errands by the way, and necessary
ones, I home, and thither came the woman with her mother which our Will
recommends to my wife. I like her well, and I think will please us. My
wife and they agreed, and she is to come the next week. At which I am
very well contented, for then I hope we shall be settled, but I must
remember that, never since I was housekeeper, I ever lived so quietly,
without any noise or one angry word almost, as I have done since my
present mayds Besse, Jane, and Susan came and were together. Now I have
taken a boy and am taking a woman, I pray God we may not be worse, but I
will observe it. After being at my office a while, home to supper and to
bed.

30th. Up and to the office, where sat long, and at noon to dinner at
home; after dinner comes Mr. Pen to visit me, and staid an houre talking
with me. I perceive something of learning he hath got, but a great
deale, if not too much, of the vanity of the French garbe and affected
manner of speech and gait. I fear all real profit he hath made of his
travel will signify little. So, he gone, I to my office and there very
busy till late at night, and so home to supper and to bed.

31st. Up by five o'clock and to my office, where T. Hater and Will met
me, and so we dispatched a great deal of my business as to the ordering
my papers and books which were behindhand. All the morning very busy at
my office. At noon home to dinner, and there my wife hath got me some
pretty good oysters, which is very soon and the soonest, I think, I ever
eat any. After dinner I up to hear my boy play upon a lute, which I have
this day borrowed of Mr. Hunt; and indeed the boy would, with little
practice, play very well upon the lute, which pleases me well. So by
coach to the Tangier Committee, and there have another small business by
which I may get a little small matter of money. Staid but little there,
and so home and to my office, where late casting up my monthly accounts,
and, blessed be God! find myself worth L1020, which is still the most I
ever was worth. So home and to bed. Prince Rupert I hear this day is to
go to command this fleete going to Guinny against the Dutch. I doubt few
will be pleased with his going, being accounted an unhappy' man. My mind
at good rest, only my father's troubles with Dr. Pepys and my brother
Tom's creditors in general do trouble me. I have got a new boy that
understands musique well, as coming to me from the King's Chappell, and
I hope will prove a good boy, and my wife and I are upon having a woman,
which for her content I am contented to venture upon the charge of
again, and she is one that our' Will finds out for us, and understands
a little musique, and I think will please us well, only her friends live
too near us. Pretty well in health, since I left off wearing of a gowne
within doors all day, and then go out with my legs into the cold, which
brought me daily pain.




SEPTEMBER 1664

Sept. 1st. A sad rainy night, up and to the office, where busy all
the morning. At noon to the 'Change and thence brought Mr. Pierce, the
Surgeon, and Creed, and dined very merry and handsomely; but my wife
not being well of those she not with us; and we cut up the great cake
Moorcocke lately sent us, which is very good. They gone I to my office,
and there very busy till late at night, and so home to supper and to
bed.

2nd. Up very betimes and walked (my boy with me) to Mr. Cole's, and
after long waiting below, he being under the barber's hands, I spoke
with him, and he did give me much hopes of getting my debt that my
brother owed me, and also that things would go well with my father. But
going to his attorney's, that he directed me to, they tell me both that
though I could bring my father to a confession of a judgment, yet he
knowing that there are specialties out against him he is bound to plead
his knowledge of them to me before he pays me, or else he must do it in
his own wrong. I took a great deal of pains this morning in the thorough
understanding hereof, and hope that I know the truth of our case, though
it be but bad, yet better than to run spending money and all to no
purpose. However, I will inquire a little more. Walked home, doing very
many errands by the way to my great content, and at the 'Change met
and spoke with several persons about serving us with pieces of eight at
Tangier. So home to dinner above stairs, my wife not being well of those
in bed. I dined by her bedside, but I got her to rise and abroad with
me by coach to Bartholomew Fayre, and our boy with us, and there shewed
them and myself the dancing on the ropes, and several other the best
shows; but pretty it is to see how our boy carries himself so innocently
clownish as would make one laugh. Here till late and dark, then up and
down, to buy combes for my wife to give her mayds, and then by coach
home, and there at the office set down my day's work, and then home to
bed.

3rd. I have had a bad night's rest to-night, not sleeping well, as my
wife observed, and once or twice she did wake me, and I thought myself
to be mightily bit with fleas, and in the morning she chid her mayds for
not looking the fleas a-days. But, when I rose, I found that it is only
the change of the weather from hot to cold, which, as I was two winters
ago, do stop my pores, and so my blood tingles and itches all day all
over my body, and so continued to-day all the day long just as I was
then, and if it continues to be so cold I fear I must come to the same
pass, but sweating cured me then, and I hope, and am told, will this
also. At the office sat all the morning, dined at home, and after dinner
to White Hall, to the Fishing Committee, but not above four of us met,
which could do nothing, and a sad thing it is to see so great a work so
ill followed, for at this pace it can come to any thing at first sight.
Mr. Hill came to tell me that he had got a gentlewoman for my wife, one
Mrs. Ferrabosco, that sings most admirably. I seemed glad of it; but
I hear she is too gallant for me, and I am not sorry that I misse her.
Thence to the office, setting some papers right, and so home to supper
and to bed, after prayers.

5th. Up and to St. James's, and there did our business with the Duke;
where all our discourse of warr in the highest measure. Prince Rupert
was with us; who is fitting himself to go to sea in the Heneretta. And
afterwards in White Hall I met him and Mr. Gray, and he spoke to me,
and in other discourse, says he, "God damn me, I can answer but for
one ship, and in that I will do my part; for it is not in that as in an
army, where a man can command every thing." By and by to a Committee
for the Fishery, the Duke of Yorke there, where, after Duke was made
Secretary, we fell to name a Committee, whereof I was willing to be one,
because I would have my hand in the business, to understand it and be
known in doing something in it; and so, after cutting out work for the
Committee, we rose, and I to my wife to Unthanke's, and with her from
shop to shop, laying out near L10 this morning in clothes for her.
And so I to the 'Change, where a while, and so home and to dinner, and
thither came W. Bowyer and dined with us; but strange to see how he
could not endure onyons in sauce to lamb, but was overcome with the
sight of it, and so-was forced to make his dinner of an egg or two. He
tells us how Mrs. Lane is undone, by her marrying so bad, and desires to
speak with me, which I know is wholly to get me to do something for her
to get her husband a place, which he is in no wise fit for. After dinner
down to Woolwich with a gaily, and then to Deptford, and so home, all
the way reading Sir J. Suck[l]ing's "Aglaura," which, methinks, is but a
mean play; nothing of design in it. Coming home it is strange to see how
I was troubled to find my wife, but in a necessary compliment, expecting
Mr. Pen to see her, who had been there and was by her people denied,
which, he having been three times, she thought not fit he should be any
more. But yet even this did raise my jealousy presently and much vex me.
However, he did not come, which pleased me, and I to supper, and to the
office till 9 o'clock or thereabouts, and so home to bed. My aunt James
had been here to-day with Kate Joyce twice to see us. The second time my
wife was at home, and they it seems are going down to Brampton, which I
am sorry for, for the charge that my father will be put to. But it must
be borne with, and my mother has a mind to see them, but I do condemn
myself mightily for my pride and contempt of my aunt and kindred that
are not so high as myself, that I have not seen her all this while, nor
invited her all this while.

6th. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning. At noon home
to dinner, then to my office and there waited, thinking to have had
Bagwell's wife come to me about business, that I might have talked with
her, but she came not. So I to White Hall by coach with Mr. Andrews,
and there I got his contract for the victualling of Tangier signed and
sealed by us there, so that all the business is well over, and I hope
to have made a good business of it and to receive L100 by it the next
weeke, for which God be praised! Thence to W. Joyce's and Anthony's, to
invite them to dinner to meet my aunt James at my house, and the rather
because they are all to go down to my father the next weeke, and so I
would be a little kind to them before they go. So home, having called
upon Doll, our pretty 'Change woman, for a pair of gloves trimmed with
yellow ribbon, to [match the] petticoate my wife bought yesterday, which
cost me 20s.; but she is so pretty, that, God forgive me! I could not
think it too much--which is a strange slavery that I stand in to beauty,
that I value nothing near it. So going home, and my coach stopping in
Newgate Market over against a poulterer's shop, I took occasion to buy
a rabbit, but it proved a deadly old one when I came to eat it, as I did
do after an hour being at my office, and after supper again there till
past 11 at night. So home,, and to bed. This day Mr. Coventry did tell
us how the Duke did receive the Dutch Embassador the other day; by
telling him that, whereas they think us in jest, he believes that the
Prince (Rupert) which goes in this fleete to Guinny will soon tell them
that we are in earnest, and that he himself will do the like here, in
the head of the fleete here at home, and that for the meschants, which
he told the Duke there were in England, which did hope to do themselves
good by the King's being at warr, says he, the English have ever united
all this private difference to attend foraigne, and that Cromwell,
notwithstanding the meschants in his time, which were the Cavaliers, did
never find them interrupt him in his foraigne businesses, and that he
did not doubt but to live to see the Dutch as fearfull of provoking the
English, under the government of a King, as he remembers them to have
been under that of a Coquin. I writ all this story to my Lord Sandwich
tonight into the Downes, it being very good and true, word for word from
Mr. Coventry to-day.

7th. Lay long to-day, pleasantly discoursing with my wife about the
dinner we are to have for the Joyces, a day or two hence. Then up and
with Mr. Margetts to Limehouse to see his ground and ropeyarde there,
which is very fine, and I believe we shall employ it for the Navy, for
the King's grounds are not sufficient to supply our defence if a warr
comes. Thence back to the 'Change, where great talke of the forwardnesse
of the Dutch, which puts us all to a stand, and particularly myself for
my Lord Sandwich, to think him to lie where he is for a sacrifice, if
they should begin with us. So home and Creed with me, and to dinner, and
after dinner I out to my office, taking in Bagwell's wife, who I knew
waited for me, but company came to me so soon that I could have no
discourse with her, as I intended, of pleasure. So anon abroad with
Creed walked to Bartholomew Fayre, this being the last day, and there
saw the best dancing on the ropes that I think I ever saw in my life,
and so all say, and so by coach home, where I find my wife hath had her
head dressed by her woman, Mercer, which is to come to her to-morrow,
but my wife being to go to a christening tomorrow, she came to do her
head up to-night. So a while to my office, and then to supper and to
bed.

8th. Up and to the office, where busy all the morning. At noon dined at
home, and I by water down to Woolwich by a galley, and back again in the
evening. All haste made in setting out this Guinny fleete, but yet not
such as will ever do the King's business if we come to a warr. My wife
this afternoon being very well dressed by her new woman, Mary Mercer,
a decayed merchant's daughter that our Will helps us to, did go to the
christening of Mrs. Mills, the parson's wife's child, where she never
was before. After I was come home Mr. Povey came to me and took me out
to supper to Mr. Bland's, who is making now all haste to be gone for
Tangier. Here pretty merry, and good discourse, fain to admire the
knowledge and experience of Mrs. Bland, who I think as good a merchant
as her husband. I went home and there find Mercer, whose person I like
well, and I think will do well, at least I hope so. So to my office a
while and then to bed.

9th. Up, and to put things in order against dinner. I out and bought
several things, among others, a dozen of silver salts; home, and to the
office, where some of us met a little, and then home, and at noon comes
my company, namely, Anthony and Will Joyce and their wives, my aunt
James newly come out of Wales, and my cozen Sarah Gyles. Her husband did
not come, and by her I did understand afterwards, that it was because he
was not yet able to pay me the 40s. she had borrowed a year ago of me.

     [Pepys would have been more proud of his cousin had he anticipated
     her husband's becoming a knight, for she was probably the same
     person whose burial is recorded in the register of St. Helen's,
     Bishopsgate, September 4th, 1704: "Dame Sarah Gyles, widow, relict
     of Sir John Gyles."--B.]

I was as merry as I could, giving them a good dinner; but W. Joyce did
so talk, that he made every body else dumb, but only laugh at him. I
forgot there was Mr. Harman and his wife, my aunt, a very good harmlesse
woman. All their talke is of her and my two she-cozen Joyces and Will's
little boy Will (who was also here to-day), down to Brampton to my
father's next week, which will be trouble and charge to them, but
however my father and mother desire to see them, and so let them. They
eyed mightily my great cupboard of plate, I this day putting my two
flaggons upon my table; and indeed it is a fine sight, and better than
ever I did hope to see of my owne. Mercer dined with us at table, this
being her first dinner in my house. After dinner left them and to White
Hall, where a small Tangier Committee, and so back again home, and there
my wife and Mercer and Tom and I sat till eleven at night, singing and
fiddling, and a great joy it is to see me master of so much pleasure in
my house, that it is and will be still, I hope, a constant pleasure to
me to be at home. The girle plays pretty well upon the harpsicon, but
only ordinary tunes, but hath a good hand; sings a little, but hath a
good voyce and eare. My boy, a brave boy, sings finely, and is the most
pleasant boy at present, while his ignorant boy's tricks last, that ever
I saw. So to supper, and with great pleasure to bed.

10th. Up and to the office, where we sate all the morning, and I much
troubled to think what the end of our great sluggishness will be, for we
do nothing in this office like people able to carry on a warr. We must
be put out, or other people put in. Dined at home, and then my wife and
I and Mercer to the Duke's house, and there saw "The Rivalls," which is
no excellent play, but good acting in it; especially Gosnell comes and
sings and dances finely, but, for all that, fell out of the key, so that
the musique could not play to her afterwards, and so did Harris also go
out of the tune to agree with her. Thence home and late writing letters,
and this night I received, by Will, L105, the first-fruits of my
endeavours in the late contract for victualling of Tangier, for which
God be praised! for I can with a safe conscience say that I have therein
saved the King L5000 per annum, and yet got myself a hope of L300 per
annum without the least wrong to the King. So to supper and to bed.

11th (Lord's day). Up and to church in the best manner I have gone a
good while, that is to say, with my wife, and her woman, Mercer, along
with us, and Tom, my boy, waiting on us. A dull sermon. Home, dined,
left my wife to go to church alone, and I walked in haste being late to
the Abbey at Westminster, according to promise to meet Jane Welsh, and
there wearily walked, expecting her till 6 o'clock from three, but no
Jane came, which vexed me, only part of it I spent with Mr. Blagrave
walking in the Abbey, he telling me the whole government and discipline
of White Hall Chappell, and the caution now used against admitting any
debauched persons, which I was glad to hear, though he tells me there
are persons bad enough. Thence going home went by Jarvis's, and there
stood Jane at the door, and so I took her in and drank with her, her
master and mistress being out of doors. She told me how she could not
come to me this afternoon, but promised another time. So I walked home
contented with my speaking with her, and walked to my uncle Wight's,
where they were all at supper, and among others comes fair Mrs.
Margarett Wight, who indeed is very pretty. So after supper home to
prayers and to bed. This afternoon, it seems, Sir J. Minnes fell sicke
at church, and going down the gallery stairs fell down dead, but came to
himself again and is pretty well.

12th. Up, and to my cozen Anthony Joyce's, and there took leave of my
aunt James, and both cozens, their wives, who are this day going down to
my father's by coach. I did give my Aunt 20s., to carry as a token to my
mother, and 10s. to Pall. Thence by coach to St. James's, and there did
our business as usual with the Duke; and saw him with great pleasure
play with his little girle,--[Afterwards Queen Mary II.]--like an
ordinary private father of a child. Thence walked to Jervas's, where
I took Jane in the shop alone, and there heard of her, her master and
mistress were going out. So I went away and came again half an hour
after. In the meantime went to the Abbey, and there went in to see the
tombs with great pleasure. Back again to Jane, and there upstairs and
drank with her, and staid two hours with her kissing her, but nothing
more. Anon took boat and by water to the Neat Houses over against Fox
Hall to have seen Greatorex dive, which Jervas and his wife were gone to
see, and there I found them (and did it the rather for a pretence for
my having been so long at their house), but being disappointed of some
necessaries to do it I staid not, but back to Jane, but she would not
go out with me. So I to Mr. Creed's lodgings, and with him walked up
and down in the New Exchange, talking mightily of the convenience and
necessity of a man's wearing good clothes, and so after eating a messe
of creame I took leave of him, he walking with me as far as Fleete
Conduit, he offering me upon my request to put out some money for me
into Backewell's hands at 6 per cent. interest, which he seldom gives,
which I will consider of, being doubtful of trusting any of these great
dealers because of their mortality, but then the convenience of having
one's money, at an houre's call is very great. Thence to my uncle
Wight's, and there supped with my wife, having given them a brave barrel
of oysters of Povy's giving me. So home and to bed.

13th. Up and, to the office, where sat busy all morning, dined at home
and after dinner to Fishmonger's Hall, where we met the first time upon
the Fishery Committee, and many good things discoursed of concerning
making of farthings, which was proposed as a way of raising money for
this business, and then that of lotterys,

     [Among the State Papers is a "Statement of Articles in the Covenant
     proposed by the Commissioners for the Royal Fishing to, Sir Ant.
     Desmarces & Co.  in reference to the regulation of lotteries; which
     are very unreasonable, and of the objections thereto" ("Calendar of
     State Papers," Domestic, 1663-64, p.  576.)]

but with great confusion; but I hope we shall fall into greater order.
So home again and to my office, where after doing business home and to a
little musique, after supper, and so to bed.

14th. Up, and wanting some things that should be laid ready for my
dressing myself I was angry, and one thing after another made my wife
give Besse warning to be gone, which the jade, whether out of fear or
ill-nature or simplicity I know not, but she took it and asked leave
to go forth to look a place, and did, which vexed me to the heart, she
being as good a natured wench as ever we shall have, but only forgetful.
At the office all the morning and at noon to the 'Change, and there went
off with Sir W. Warren and took occasion to desire him to lend me L100,
which he said he would let the have with all his heart presently, as he
had promised me a little while ago to give me for my pains in his two
great contracts for masts L100, and that this should be it. To which end
I did move it to him, and by this means I hope to be, possessed of the
L100 presently within 2 or 3 days. So home to dinner, and then to the
office, and down to Blackwall by water to view a place found out for
laying of masts, and I think it will be most proper. So home and there
find Mr. Pen come to visit my wife, and staid with them till sent for to
Mr. Bland's, whither by appointment I was to go to supper, and against
my will left them together, but, God knows, without any reason of fear
in my conscience of any evil between them, but such is my natural folly.
Being thither come they would needs have my wife, and so Mr. Bland and
his wife (the first time she was ever at my house or my wife at hers)
very civilly went forth and brought her and W. Pen, and there Mr. Povy
and we supped nobly and very merry, it being to take leave of Mr. Bland,
who is upon going soon to Tangier. So late home and to bed.

15th. At the office all the morning, then to the 'Change, and so home to
dinner, where Luellin dined with us, and after dinner many people came
in and kept me all the afternoon, among other the Master and Wardens
of Chyrurgeon's Hall, who staid arguing their cause with me; I did give
them the best answer I could, and after their being two hours with me
parted, and I to my office to do business, which is much on my hands,
and so late home to supper and to bed.

16th. Up betimes and to my office, where all the morning very busy
putting papers to rights. And among other things Mr. Gauden coming to
me, I had a good opportunity to speak to him about his present, which
hitherto hath been a burden: to me, that I could not do it, because I
was doubtfull that he meant it as a temptation to me to stand by him in
the business of Tangier victualling; but he clears me it was not, and
that he values me and my proceedings therein very highly, being but
what became me, and that what he did was for my old kindnesses to him in
dispatching of his business, which I was glad to hear, and with my heart
in good rest and great joy parted, and to my business again. At noon to
the 'Change, where by appointment I met Sir W. Warren, and afterwards to
the Sun taverne, where he brought to me, being all alone; L100 in a bag,
which I offered him to give him my receipt for, but he told me, no, it
was my owne, which he had a little while since promised me and was glad
that (as I had told him two days since) it would now do me courtesy; and
so most kindly he did give it me, and I as joyfully, even out of myself,
carried it home in a coach, he himself expressly taking care that
nobody might see this business done, though I was willing enough to have
carried a servant with me to have received it, but he advised me to do
it myself. So home with it and to dinner; after dinner I forth with my
boy to buy severall things, stools and andirons and candlesticks, &c.,
household stuff, and walked to the mathematical instrument maker in
Moorefields and bought a large pair of compasses, and there met Mr.
Pargiter, and he would needs have me drink a cup of horse-radish ale,
which he and a friend of his troubled with the stone have been drinking
of, which we did and then walked into the fields as far almost as Sir
G. Whitmore's, all the way talking of Russia, which, he says, is a
sad place; and, though Moscow is a very great city, yet it is from the
distance between house and house, and few people compared with this, and
poor, sorry houses, the Emperor himself living in a wooden house, his
exercise only flying a hawk at pigeons and carrying pigeons ten or
twelve miles off and then laying wagers which pigeon shall come soonest
home to her house. All the winter within doors, some few playing at
chesse, but most drinking their time away. Women live very slavishly
there, and it seems in the Emperor's court no room hath above two or
three windows, and those the greatest not a yard wide or high, for
warmth in winter time; and that the general cure for all diseases there
is their sweating houses, or people that are poor they get into their
ovens, being heated, and there lie. Little learning among things of
any sort. Not a man that speaks Latin, unless the Secretary of State
by chance. Mr. Pargiter and I walked to the 'Change together and there
parted, and so I to buy more things and then home, and after a little
at my office, home to supper and to bed. This day old Hardwicke came and
redeemed a watch he had left with me in pawne for 40s. seven years ago,
and I let him gave it. Great talk that the Dutch will certainly be out
this week, and will sail directly to Guinny, being convoyed out of the
Channel with 42 sail of ships.

17th. Up and to the office, where Mr. Coventry very angry to see things
go so coldly as they do, and I must needs say it makes me fearful every
day of having some change of the office, and the truth is, I am of late
a little guilty of being remiss myself of what I used to be, but I hope
I shall come to my old pass again, my family being now settled again.
Dined at home, and to the office, where late busy in setting all my
businesses in order, and I did a very great and a very contenting
afternoon's work. This day my aunt Wight sent my wife a new scarfe, with
a compliment for the many favours she had received of her, which is the
several things we have sent her. I am glad enough of it, for I see my
uncle is so given up to the Wights that I hope for little more of them.
So home to supper and to bed.

18th (Lord's day). Up and to church all of us. At noon comes Anthony
and W. Joyce (their wives being in the country with my father) and dined
with me very merry as I can be in such company. After dinner walked
to Westminster (tiring them by the way, and so left them, Anthony
in Cheapside and the other in the Strand), and there spent all the
afternoon in the Cloysters as I had agreed with Jane Welsh, but she came
not, which vexed me, staying till 5 o'clock, and then walked homeward,
and by coach to the old Exchange, and thence to my aunt Wight's, and
invited her and my uncle to supper, and so home, and by and by they
came, and we eat a brave barrel of oysters Mr. Povy sent me this
morning, and very merry at supper, and so to prayers and to bed. Last
night it seems my aunt Wight did send my wife a new scarfe, laced, as a
token for her many givings to her. It is true now and then we give them
some toys, as oranges, &c., but my aime is to get myself something more
from my uncle's favour than this.

19th. Up, my wife and I having a little anger about her woman already,
she thinking that I take too much care of her at table to mind her (my
wife) of cutting for her, but it soon over, and so up and with Sir W.
Batten and Sir W. Pen to St. James's, and there did our business with
the Duke, and thence homeward straight, calling at the Coffee-house, and
there had very good discourse with Sir----Blunt and Dr. Whistler about
Egypt and other things. So home to dinner, my wife having put on to-day
her winter new suit of moyre, which is handsome, and so after dinner I
did give her L15 to lay out in linen and necessaries for the house
and to buy a suit for Pall, and I myself to White Hall to a Tangier
Committee, where Colonell Reames hath brought us so full and methodical
an account of all matters there, that I never have nor hope to see the
like of any publique business while I live again. The Committee up, I to
Westminster to Jervas's, and spoke with Jane; who I find cold and not
so desirous of a meeting as before, and it is no matter, I shall be
the freer from the inconvenience that might follow thereof, besides
offending God Almighty and neglecting my business. So by coach home and
to my office, where late, and so to supper and to bed. I met with Dr.
Pierce to-day, who, speaking of Dr. Frazier's being so earnest to have
such a one (one Collins) go chyrurgeon to the Prince's person will have
him go in his terms and with so much money put into his hands, he tells
me (when I was wondering that Frazier should order things with the
Prince in that confident manner) that Frazier is so great with my Lady
Castlemayne, and Stewart, and all the ladies at Court, in helping to
slip their calfes when there is occasion, and with the great men in
curing of their claps that he can do what he please with the King, in
spite of any man, and upon the same score with the Prince; they all
having more or less occasion to make use of him. Sir G. Carteret tells
me this afternoon that the Dutch are not yet ready to set out; and by
that means do lose a good wind which would carry them out and keep us
in, and moreover he says that they begin to boggle in the business, and
he thinks may offer terms of peace for all this, and seems to argue
that it will be well for the King too, and I pray God send it. Colonell
Reames did, among other things, this day tell me how it is clear that,
if my Lord Tiviott had lived, he would have quite undone Tangier, or
designed himself to be master of it. He did put the King upon most
great, chargeable, and unnecessary works there, and took the course
industriously to deter, all other merchants but himself to deal there,
and to make both King and all others pay what he pleased for all that
was brought thither.

20th. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, at noon to the
'Change, and there met by appointment with Captain Poyntz, who hath some
place, or title to a place, belonging to gameing, and so I discoursed
with him about the business of our improving of the Lotterys, to the
King's benefit, and that of the Fishery, and had some light from him in
the business, and shall, he says, have more in writing from him. So home
to dinner and then abroad to the Fishing Committee at Fishmongers' Hall,
and there sat and did some business considerable, and so up and home,
and there late at my office doing much business, and I find with great
delight that I am come to my good temper of business again. God continue
me in it. So home to supper, it being washing day, and to bed.

21st. Up, and by coach to Mr. Povy's, and there got him to signe the
payment of Captain Tayler's bills for the remainder of freight for
the Eagle, wherein I shall be gainer about L30, thence with him to
Westminster by coach to Houseman's [Huysman] the great picture drawer,
and saw again very fine pictures, and have his promise, for Mr. Povy's
sake, to take pains in what picture I shall set him about, and I think
to have my wife's. But it is a strange thing to observe and fit for me
to remember that I am at no time so unwilling to part with money as when
I am concerned in the getting of it most, as I thank God of late I have
got more in this month, viz. near 0250, than ever I did in half a year
before in my life, I think. Thence to White Hall with him, and so walked
to the old Exchange and back to Povy's to dinner, where great and good
company; among others Sir John Skeffington, whom I knew at Magdalen
College, a fellow-commoner, my fellow-pupil, but one with whom I had no
great acquaintance, he being then, God knows, much above me. Here I
was afresh delighted with Mr. Povy's house and pictures of perspective,
being strange things to think how they do delude one's eye, that
methinks it would make a man doubtful of swearing that ever he saw any
thing. Thence with him to St. James's, and so to White Hall to a Tangier
Committee, and hope I have light of another opportunity of getting a
little money if Sir W. Warren will use me kindly for deales to Tangier,
and with the hopes went joyfully home, and there received Captain
Tayler's money, received by Will to-day, out of which (as I said above)
I shall get above L30. So with great comfort to bed, after supper. By
discourse this day I have great hopes from Mr. Coventry that the Dutch
and we shall not fall out.

22nd. Up and at the office all the morning. To the 'Change at noon, and
among other things discoursed with Sir William Warren what I might do
to get a little money by carrying of deales to Tangier, and told him the
opportunity I have there of doing it, and he did give me some advice,
though not so good as he would have done at any other time of the year,
but such as I hope to make good use of, and get a little money by. So to
Sir G. Carteret's to dinner, and he and I and Captain Cocke all alone,
and good discourse, and thence to a Committee of Tangier at White Hall,
and so home, where I found my wife not well, and she tells me she thinks
she is with child, but I neither believe nor desire it. But God's will
be done! So to my office late, and home to supper and to bed; having got
a strange cold in my head, by flinging off my hat at dinner, and sitting
with the wind in my neck.

     [In Lord Clarendon's Essay, "On the decay of respect paid to Age,"
     he says that in his younger days he never kept his hat on before
     those older than himself, except at dinner.--B.]

23rd. My cold and pain in my head increasing, and the palate of my mouth
falling, I was in great pain all night. My wife also was not well,
so that a mayd was fain to sit up by her all night. Lay long in the
morning, at last up, and amongst others comes Mr. Fuller, that was the
wit of Cambridge, and Praevaricator

     [At the Commencement (Comitia Majora) in July, the Praevaricator, or
     Varier, held a similar position to the Tripos at the Comitia Minora.
     He was so named from varying the question which he proposed, either
     by a play upon the words or by the transposition of the terms in
     which it was expressed.  Under the pretence of maintaining some
     philosophical question, he poured out a medley of absurd jokes and
     'personal ridicule, which gradually led to the abolition of the
     office.  In Thoresby's "Diary" we read, "Tuesday, July 6th.  The
     Praevaricator's speech was smart and ingenious, attended with
     vollies of hurras" (see Wordsworth's "University Life in the
     Eighteenth Century ").--M. B.]

in my time, and staid all the morning with me discoursing, and his
business to get a man discharged, which I did do for him. Dined with
little heart at noon, in the afternoon against my will to the office,
where Sir G. Carteret and we met about an order of the Council for the
hiring him a house, giving him L1000 fine, and L70 per annum for
it. Here Sir J. Minnes took occasion, in the most childish and most
unbeseeming manner, to reproach us all, but most himself, that he was
not valued as Comptroller among us, nor did anything but only set his
hand to paper, which is but too true; and every body had a palace, and
he no house to lie in, and wished he had but as much to build him a
house with, as we have laid out in carved worke. It was to no end to
oppose, but all bore it, and after laughed at him for it. So home, and
late reading "The Siege of Rhodes" to my wife, and then to bed, my head
being in great pain and my palate still down.

24th. Up and to the office, where all the morning busy, then home to
dinner, and so after dinner comes one Phillips, who is concerned in
the Lottery, and from him I collected much concerning that business. I
carried him in my way to White Hall and set him down at Somersett House.
Among other things he told me that Monsieur Du Puy, that is so great a
man at the Duke of Yorke's, and this man's great opponent, is a knave
and by quality but a tailor. To the Tangier Committee, and there I
opposed Colonell Legg's estimate of supplies of provisions to be sent
to Tangier till all were ashamed of it, and he fain after all his good
husbandry and seeming ignorance and joy to have the King's money saved,
yet afterwards he discovered all his design to be to keep the furnishing
of these things to the officers of the Ordnance, but Mr. Coventry
seconded me, and between us we shall save the King some money in the
year. In one business of deales in L520, I offer to save L172, and yet
purpose getting money, to myself by it. So home and to my office, and
business being done home to supper and so to bed, my head and throat
being still out of order mightily. This night Prior of Brampton came and
paid me L40, and I find this poor painful man is the only thriving and
purchasing man in the town almost. We were told to-day of a Dutch ship
of 3 or 400 tons, where all the men were dead of the plague, and the
ship cast ashore at Gottenburgh.

25th (Lord's day). Up, and my throat being yet very sore, and, my head
out of order, we went not to church, but I spent all the morning reading
of "The Madd Lovers," a very good play, and at noon comes Harman and his
wife, whom I sent for to meet the Joyces, but they came not. It seems
Will has got a fall off his horse and broke his face. However, we were
as merry as I could in their company, and we had a good chine of beef,
but I had no taste nor stomach through my cold, and therefore little
pleased with my dinner. It raining, they sat talking with us all the
afternoon. So anon they went away; and then I to read another play, "The
Custome of the Country," which is a very poor one, methinks. Then to
supper, prayers, and bed.

26th. Up pretty well again, but my mouth very scabby, my cold being
going away, so that I was forced to wear a great black patch, but that
would not do much good, but it happens we did not go to the Duke to-day,
and so I staid at home busy all the morning. At noon, after dinner,
to the 'Change, and thence home to my office again, where busy, well
employed till 10 at night, and so home to supper and to bed, my mind
a little troubled that I have not of late kept up myself so briske in
business; but mind my ease a little too much and my family upon the
coming of Mercer and Tom. So that I have not kept company, nor appeared
very active with Mr. Coventry, but now I resolve to settle to it again,
not that I have idled all my time, but as to my ease something. So I
have looked a little too much after Tangier and the Fishery, and that
in the sight of Mr. Coventry, but I have good reason to love myself for
serving Tangier, for it is one of the best flowers in my garden.

27th. Lay long, sleeping, it raining and blowing very hard. Then up and
to the office, my mouth still being scabby and a patch on it. At the
office all the morning. At noon dined at home, and so after dinner
(Lewellin dining with me and in my way talking about Deering) to the
Fishing Committee, and had there very many fine things argued, and I
hope some good will cone of it. So home, where my wife having (after all
her merry discourse of being with child) her months upon her is gone to
bed. I to my office very late doing business, then home to supper and
to bed. To-night Mr. T. Trice and Piggot came to see me, and desire my
going down to Brampton Court, where for Piggot's sake, for whom it is
necessary, I should go, I would be glad to go, and will, contrary to my
purpose, endeavour it, but having now almost L1000, if not above, in my
house, I know not what to do with it, and that will trouble my mind to
leave in the house, and I not at home.

28th. Up and by water with Mr. Tucker down to Woolwich, first to do
several businesses of the King's, then on board Captain Fisher's ship,
which we hire to carry goods to Tangier. All the way going and coming
I reading and discoursing over some papers of his which he, poor man,
having some experience, but greater conceit of it than is fit, did at
the King's first coming over make proposals of, ordering in a new manner
the whole revenue of the kingdom, but, God knows, a most weak thing;
however, one paper I keep wherein he do state the main branches of the
publick revenue fit to consider and remember. So home, very cold, and
fearfull of having got some pain, but, thanks be to God! I was well
after it. So to dinner, and after dinner by coach to White Hall,
thinking to have met at a Committee of Tangier, but nobody being there
but my Lord Rutherford, he would needs carry me and another Scotch Lord
to a play, and so we saw, coming late, part of "The Generall," my Lord
Orrery's (Broghill) second play; but, Lord! to see how no more either in
words, sense, or design, it is to his "Harry the 5th" is not imaginable,
and so poorly acted, though in finer clothes, is strange. And here I
must confess breach of a vowe in appearance, but I not desiring it, but
against my will, and my oathe being to go neither at my own charge nor
at another's, as I had done by becoming liable to give them another, as
I am to Sir W. Pen and Mr. Creed; but here I neither know which of them
paid for me, nor, if I did, am I obliged ever to return the like, or did
it by desire or with any willingness. So that with a safe conscience I
do think my oathe is not broke and judge God Almighty will not think it
other wise. Thence to W. Joyce's, and there found my aunt and cozen Mary
come home from my father's with great pleasure and content, and thence
to Kate's and found her also mighty pleased with her journey and their
good usage of them, and so home, troubled in my conscience at my being
at a play. But at home I found Mercer playing on her Vyall, which is a
pretty instrument, and so I to the Vyall and singing till late, and so
to bed. My mind at a great losse how to go down to Brampton this weeke,
to satisfy Piggott; but what with the fears of my house, my money, my
wife, and my office, I know not how in the world to think of it, Tom
Hater being out of towne, and I having near L1000 in my house.

29th. Up and to the office, where all the morning, dined at home and
Creed with me; after dinner I to Sir G. Carteret, and with him to his
new house he is taking in Broad Streete, and there surveyed all the
rooms and bounds, in order to the drawing up a lease thereof; and that
done, Mr. Cutler, his landlord, took me up and down, and showed me all
his ground and house, which is extraordinary great, he having bought
all the Augustine Fryers, and many, many a L1000 he hath and will bury
there. So home to my business, clearing my papers and preparing my
accounts against tomorrow for a monthly and a great auditt. So to supper
and to bed. Fresh newes come of our beating the Dutch at Guinny quite
out of all their castles almost, which will make them quite mad here
at home sure. And Sir G. Carteret did tell me, that the King do joy
mightily at it; but asked him laughing, "But," says he, "how shall I do
to answer this to the Embassador when he comes?" Nay they say that we
have beat them out of the New Netherlands too;

     [Captain (afterwards Sir Robert) Holmes' expedition to attack the
     Dutch settlements in Africa eventuated in an important exploit.
     Holmes suddenly left the coast of Africa, sailed across the
     Atlantic, and reduced the Dutch settlement of New Netherlands to
     English rule, under the title of New York.  "The short and true
     state of the matter is this: the country mentioned was part of the
     province of Virginia, and, as there is no settling an extensive
     country at once, a few Swedes crept in there, who surrendered the
     plantations they could not defend to the Dutch, who, having bought
     the charts and papers of one Hudson, a seaman, who, by the
     commission from the crown of England, discovered a river, to which
     he gave his name, conceited they had purchased a province.
     Sometimes, when we had strength in those parts, they were English
     subjects; at others, when that strength declined, they were subjects
     of the United Provinces.  However, upon King Charles's claim the
     States disowned the title, but resumed it during our confusions.  On
     March 12th, 1663-64, Charles II. granted it to the Duke of York
 ... The King sent Holmes, when he returned, to the Tower, and did
     not discharge him; till he made it evidently appear that he had not
     infringed the law of nations ".  (Campbell's "Naval History," vol.
     ii, p., 89).  How little did the King or Holmes himself foresee
     the effects of the capture,--B.]

so that we have been doing them mischief for a great while in several
parts of the world; without publique knowledge or reason. Their fleete
for Guinny is now, they say, ready, and abroad, and will be going
this week. Coming home to-night, I did go to examine my wife's house
accounts, and finding things that seemed somewhat doubtful, I was angry
though she did make it pretty plain, but confessed that when she do
misse a sum, she do add something to other things to make it, and, upon
my being very angry, she do protest she will here lay up something for
herself to buy her a necklace with, which madded me and do still trouble
me, for I fear she will forget by degrees the way of living cheap and
under a sense of want.

30th. Up, and all day, both morning and afternoon, at my accounts, it
being a great month, both for profit and layings out, the last being L89
for kitchen and clothes for myself and wife, and a few extraordinaries
for the house; and my profits, besides salary, L239; so that I have this
weeke, notwithstanding great layings out, and preparations for laying
out, which I make as paid this month, my balance to come to L1203, for
which the Lord's name be praised! Dined at home at noon, staying long
looking for Kate Joyce and my aunt James and Mary, but they came not. So
my wife abroad to see them, and took Mary Joyce to a play. Then in
the evening came and sat working by me at the office, and late home
to supper and to bed, with my heart in good rest for this day's work,
though troubled to think that my last month's negligence besides the
making me neglect business and spend money, and lessen myself both as
to business and the world and myself, I am fain to preserve my vowe by
paying 20s. dry--[ Dry = hard, as "hard cash." ]--money into the poor's
box, because I had not fulfilled all my memorandums and paid all my
petty debts and received all my petty credits, of the last month, but I
trust in God I shall do so no more.




OCTOBER 1664

October 1st. Up and at the office both forenoon and afternoon very busy,
and with great pleasure in being so. This morning Mrs. Lane (now Martin)
like a foolish woman, came to the Horseshoe hard by, and sent for me
while I was: at the office; to come to speak with her by a note sealed
up, I know to get me to do something for her husband, but I sent her an
answer that I would see her at Westminster, and so I did not go, and she
went away, poor soul. At night home to supper, weary, and my eyes sore
with writing and reading, and to bed. We go now on with great vigour
in preparing against the Dutch, who, they say, will now fall upon us
without doubt upon this high newes come of our beating them so, wholly
in Guinny.

2nd (Lord's day). My wife not being well to go to church I walked with
my boy through the City, putting in at several churches, among others
at Bishopsgate, and there saw the picture usually put before the King's
book, put up in the church, but very ill painted, though it were a
pretty piece to set up in a church. I intended to have seen the Quakers,
who, they say, do meet every Lord's day at the Mouth at Bishopsgate; but
I could see none stirring, nor was it fit to aske for the place, so I
walked over Moorefields, and thence to Clerkenwell church, and there, as
I wished, sat next pew to the fair Butler, who indeed is a most perfect
beauty still; and one I do very much admire myself for my choice of her
for a beauty, she having the best lower part of her face that ever I
saw all days of my life. After church I walked to my Lady Sandwich's,
through my Lord Southampton's new buildings in the fields behind Gray's
Inn; and, indeed, they are a very great and a noble work. So I dined
with my Lady, and the same innocent discourse that we used to have, only
after dinner, being alone, she asked me my opinion about Creed, whether
he would have a wife or no, and what he was worth, and proposed Mrs.
Wright for him, which, she says, she heard he was once inquiring after.
She desired I would take a good time and manner of proposing it, and
I said I would, though I believed he would love nothing but money, and
much was not to be expected there, she said. So away back to Clerkenwell
Church, thinking to have got sight of la belle Boteler again, but
failed, and so after church walked all over the fields home, and there
my wife was angry with me for not coming home, and for gadding abroad
to look after beauties, she told me plainly, so I made all peace, and
to supper. This evening came Mrs. Lane (now Martin) with her husband to
desire my helpe about a place for him. It seems poor Mr. Daniel is dead
of the Victualling Office, a place too good for this puppy to follow him
in. But I did give him the best words I could, and so after drinking a
glasse of wine sent them going, but with great kindnesse. Go to supper,
prayers, and to bed.

3rd. Up with Sir J. Minnes, by coach, to St. James's; and there all the
newes now of very hot preparations for the Dutch: and being with the
Duke, he told us he was resolved to make a tripp himself, and that Sir
W. Pen should go in the same ship with him. Which honour, God forgive
me! I could grudge him, for his knavery and dissimulation, though I
do not envy much the having the same place myself. Talke also of great
haste in the getting out another fleete, and building some ships; and
now it is likely we have put one another by each other's dalliance past
a retreate. Thence with our heads full of business we broke up, and I to
my barber's, and there only saw Jane and stroked her under the chin, and
away to the Exchange, and there long about several businesses, hoping to
get money by them, and thence home to dinner and there found Hawly. But
meeting Bagwell's wife at the office before I went home I took her
into the office and there kissed her only. She rebuked me for doing it,
saying that did I do so much to many bodies else it would be a stain to
me. But I do not see but she takes it well enough, though in the main I
believe she is very honest. So after some kind discourse we parted, and
I home to dinner, and after dinner down to Deptford, where I found Mr.
Coventry, and there we made, an experiment of Holland's and our cordage,
and ours outdid it a great deale, as my book of observations tells
particularly. Here we were late, and so home together by water, and I
to my office, where late, putting things in order. Mr. Bland came this
night to me to take his leave of me, he going to Tangier, wherein I wish
him good successe. So home to supper and to bed, my mind troubled at the
businesses I have to do, that I cannot mind them as I ought to do and
get money, and more that I have neglected my frequenting and seeming
more busy publicly than I have done of late in this hurry of business,
but there is time left to recover it, and I trust in God I shall.

4th. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and this
morning Sir W. Pen went to Chatham to look: after the ships now going
out thence, and particularly that wherein the Duke and himself go. He
took Sir G. Ascue with: him, whom, I believe, he hath brought into play.
At noon to the 'Change and thence home, where I found my aunt James
and the two she joyces. They dined and were merry with us. Thence
after dinner to a play, to see "The Generall;" which is so dull and so
ill-acted, that I think it is the worst. I ever saw or heard in all my
days. I happened to sit near; to Sir Charles Sidly; who I find a very
witty man, and he did at every line take notice of the dullness of
the poet and badness of the action, that most pertinently; which I
was mightily taken with; and among others where by Altemire's command
Clarimont, the Generall, is commanded to rescue his Rivall, whom she
loved, Lucidor, he, after a great deal of demurre, broke out; "Well,
I'le save my Rivall and make her confess, that I deserve, while he do
but possesse." "Why, what, pox," says Sir Charles Sydly, "would he
have him have more, or what is there more to be had of a woman than the
possessing her?" Thence-setting all them at home, I home with my wife
and Mercer, vexed at my losing my time and above 20s. in money, and
neglecting my business to see so bad a play. To-morrow they told us
should be acted, or the day after, a new play, called "The Parson's
Dreame," acted all by women. So to my office, and there did business;
and so home to supper and to bed.

5th. Up betimes and to my office, and thence by coach to New Bridewell
to meet with Mr. Poyntz to discourse with him (being Master of the
Workhouse there) about making of Bewpers for us. But he was not within;
however his clerke did lead me up and down through all the house, and
there I did with great pleasure see the many pretty works, and the
little children employed, every one to do something, which was a very
fine sight, and worthy encouragement. I cast away a crowne among them,
and so to the 'Change and among the Linnen Wholesale Drapers to enquire
about Callicos, to see what can be done with them for the supplying our
want of Bewpers for flaggs, and I think I shall do something therein
to good purpose for the King. So to the Coffeehouse, and there fell in
discourse with the Secretary of the Virtuosi of Gresham College, and had
very fine discourse with him. He tells me of a new invented instrument
to be tried before the College anon, and I intend to see it. So to
Trinity House, and there I dined among the old dull fellows, and so home
and to my office a while, and then comes Mr. Cocker to see me, and I
discoursed with him about his writing and ability of sight, and how I
shall do to get some glasse or other to helpe my eyes by candlelight;
and he tells me he will bring me the helps he hath within a day or two,
and shew me what he do. Thence to the Musique-meeting at the Postoffice,
where I was once before. And thither anon come all the Gresham College,
and a great deal of noble company: and the new instrument was brought
called the Arched Viall,

     ["There seems to be a curious fate reigning over the instruments
     which have the word 'arch' prefixed to their name.  They have no
     vitality, and somehow or other come to grief.  Even the famous
     archlute, which was still a living thing in the time of Handel, has
     now disappeared from the concert room and joined Mr. Pepys's 'Arched
     Viall' in the limbo of things forgotten....  Mr. Pepys's
     verdict that it would never do...  has been fully confirmed by
     the event, as his predictions usually were, being indeed always
     founded on calm judgment and close observation."--B. (Hueffer's
     Italian and other Studies, 1883, p.  263).]

where being tuned with lute-strings, and played on with kees like an
organ, a piece of parchment is always kept moving; and the strings,
which by the kees are pressed down upon it, are grated in imitation of a
bow, by the parchment; and so it is intended to resemble several vyalls
played on with one bow, but so basely and harshly, that it will never
do. But after three hours' stay it could not be fixed in tune; and so
they were fain to go to some other musique of instruments, which I am
grown quite out of love with, and so I, after some good discourse with
Mr. Spong, Hill, Grant, and Dr. Whistler, and others by turns, I home
to my office and there late, and so home, where I understand my wife has
spoke to Jane and ended matters of difference between her and her, and
she stays with us, which I am glad of; for her fault is nothing
but sleepiness and forgetfulness, otherwise a good-natured, quiet,
well-meaning, honest servant, and one that will do as she is bid, so one
called upon her and will see her do it. This morning, by three o'clock,
the Prince--[Rupert]--and King, and Duke with him, went down the River,
and the Prince under sail the next tide after, and so is gone from the
Hope. God give him better successe than he used to have! This day Mr.
Bland went away hence towards his voyage to Tangier. This day also I
had a letter from an unknown hand that tells me that Jacke Angier, he
believes, is dead at Lisbon, for he left him there ill.

6th. Up and to the office, where busy all the morning, among other
things about this of the flags and my bringing in of callicos to oppose
Young and Whistler. At noon by promise Mr. Pierce and his wife and Madam
Clerke and her niece came and dined with me to a rare chine of beefe and
spent the afternoon very pleasantly all the afternoon, and then to my
office in the evening, they being gone, and late at business, and then
home to supper and to bed, my mind coming to itself in following of my
business.

7th. Lay pretty while with some discontent abed, even to the having
bad words with my wife, and blows too, about the ill-serving up of
our victuals yesterday; but all ended in love, and so I rose and to
my office busy all the morning. At noon dined at home, and then to my
office again, and then abroad to look after callicos for flags, and hope
to get a small matter by my pains therein and yet save the King a great
deal of money, and so home to my office, and there came Mr. Cocker, and
brought me a globe of glasse, and a frame of oyled paper, as I desired,
to show me the manner of his gaining light to grave by, and to lessen
the glaringnesse of it at pleasure by an oyled paper. This I bought of
him, giving him a crowne for it; and so, well satisfied, he went away,
and I to my business again, and so home to supper, prayers, and to bed.

8th. All the morning at the office, and after dinner abroad, and among
other things contracted with one Mr. Bridges, at the White Bear on
Cornhill, for 100 pieces of Callico to make flaggs; and as I know I
shall save the King money, so I hope to get a little for my pains and
venture of my own money myself. Late in the evening doing business, and
then comes Captain Tayler, and he and I till 12 o'clock at night arguing
about the freight of his ship Eagle, hired formerly by me to Tangier,
and at last we made an end, and I hope to get a little money, some small
matter by it. So home to bed, being weary and cold, but contented that I
have made an end of that business.

9th (Lord's day). Lay pretty long, but however up time enough with my
wife to go to church. Then home to dinner, and Mr. Fuller, my Cambridge
acquaintance, coming to me about what he was with me lately, to release
a waterman, he told me he was to preach at Barking Church; and so I
to heare him, and he preached well and neatly. Thence, it being time
enough, to our owne church, and there staid wholly privately at the
great doore to gaze upon a pretty lady, and from church dogged her home,
whither she went to a house near Tower hill, and I think her to be one
of the prettiest women I ever saw. So home, and at my office a while
busy, then to my uncle Wight's, whither it seems my wife went after
sermon and there supped, but my aunt and uncle in a very ill humour one
with another, but I made shift with much ado to keep them from scolding,
and so after supper home and to bed without prayers, it being cold, and
to-morrow washing day.

10th. Up and, it being rainy, in Sir W. Pen's coach to St. James's,
and there did our usual business with the Duke, and more and more
preparations every day appear against the Dutch, and (which I must
confess do a little move my envy) Sir W. Pen do grow every day more and
more regarded by the Duke,

     ["The duke had decided that the English fleet should consist of
     three  squadrons to be commanded by himself, Prince Rupert, and Lord
     Sandwich, from which arrangement the two last, who were land
     admirals; had concluded that Penn would have no concern in this
     fleet.  Neither the duke, Rupert, nor Sandwich had ever been engaged
     in an encounter of fleets....  Penn alone of the four was
     familiar with all these things.  By the duke's unexpected
     announcement that he should take Penn with him into his own  ship,
     Rupert and Sandwich at once discovered that they would be really and
     practically under Penn's command in everything."]

because of his service heretofore in the Dutch warr which I am confident
is by some strong obligations he hath laid upon Mr. Coventry; for Mr.
Coventry must needs know that he is a man of very mean parts, but only
a bred seaman: Going home in coach with Sir W. Batten he told me how Sir
J. Minnes by the means of Sir R. Ford was the last night brought to his
house and did discover the reason of his so long discontent with him,
and now they are friends again, which I am sorry for, but he told it me
so plainly that I see there is no thorough understanding between them,
nor love, and so I hope there will be no great combination in any thing,
nor do I see Sir J. Minnes very fond as he used to be. But: Sir W.
Batten do raffle still against Mr. Turner and his wife, telling me he
is a false fellow, and his wife a false woman, and has rotten teeth
and false, set in with wire, and as I know they are so, so I am glad
he finds it so. To the Coffee-house, and thence to the 'Change, and
therewith Sir W. Warren to the Coffee-house behind the 'Change, and sat
alone with him till 4 o'clock talking of his businesses first and then
of business in general, and discourse how I might get money and how to
carry myself to advantage to contract no envy and yet make the world
see my pains; which was with great content to me, and a good friend and
helpe I am like to find him, for which God be thanked! So home to dinner
at 4 o'clock, and then to the office, and there late, and so home to
supper and to bed, having sat up till past twelve at night to look over
the account of the collections for the Fishery, and the loose and base
manner that monies so collected are disposed of in, would make a
man never part with a penny in that manner, and, above all, the
inconvenience of having a great man, though never so seeming pious as
my Lord Pembroke is. He is too great to be called to an account, and
is abused by his servants, and yet obliged to defend them for his owne
sake. This day, by the blessing of God, my wife and I have been married
nine years: but my head being full of business, I did not think of it
to keep it in any extraordinary manner. But bless God for our long lives
and loves and health together, which the same God long continue, I wish,
from my very heart!

11th. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning. My wife this
morning went, being invited, to my Lady Sandwich, and I alone at home at
dinner, till by and by Luellin comes and dines with me. He tells me what
a bawdy loose play this "Parson's Wedding" is, that is acted by nothing
but women at the King's house, and I am glad of it. Thence to the
Fishery in Thames Street, and there several good discourses about the
letting of the Lotterys, and, among others, one Sir Thomas Clifford,
whom yet I knew not, do speak very well and neatly. Thence I to my cozen
Will Joyce to get him to go to Brampton with me this week, but I think
he will not, and I am not a whit sorry for it, for his company both
chargeable and troublesome. So home and to my office, and then to supper
and then to my office again till late, and so home, with my head and
heart full of business, and so to bed. My wife tells me the sad news of
my Lady Castlemayne's being now become so decayed, that one would not
know her; at least far from a beauty, which I am sorry for. This day
with great joy Captain Titus told us the particulars of the French's
expedition against Gigery upon the Barbary Coast, in the Straights, with
6,000 chosen men. They have taken the Fort of Gigery, wherein were five
men and three guns, which makes the whole story of the King of France's
policy and power to be laughed at.

12th. This morning all the morning at my office ordering things against
my journey to-morrow. At noon to the Coffeehouse, where very good
discourse. For newes, all say De Ruyter is gone to Guinny before us. Sir
J. Lawson is come to Portsmouth; and our fleete is hastening all speed:
I mean this new fleete. Prince Rupert with his is got into the Downes.
At home dined with me W. Joyce and a friend of his. W. Joyce will go
with me to Brampton. After dinner I out to Mr. Bridges, the linnen
draper, and evened with (him) for 100 pieces of callico, and did give
him L208 18s., which I now trust the King for, but hope both to save
the King money and to get a little by it to boot. Thence by water up
and down all the timber yards to look out some Dram timber, but can find
none for our turne at the price I would have; and so I home, and there
at my office late doing business against my journey to clear my hands of
every thing for two days. So home and to supper and bed.

13th. After being at the office all the morning, I home and dined, and
taking leave of my wife with my mind not a little troubled how she would
look after herself or house in my absence, especially, too, leaving a
considerable sum of money in the office, I by coach to the Red Lyon in
Aldersgate Street, and there, by agreement, met W. Joyce and Tom Trice,
and mounted, I upon a very fine mare that Sir W. Warren helps me to, and
so very merrily rode till it was very darke, I leading the way through
the darke to Welling, and there, not being very weary, to supper and to
bed. But very bad accommodation at the Swan. In this day's journey I met
with Mr. White, Cromwell's chaplin that was, and had a great deale of
discourse with him. Among others, he tells me that Richard is, and hath
long been, in France, and is now going into Italy. He owns publiquely
that he do correspond, and return him all his money. That Richard hath
been in some straits at the beginning; but relieved by his friends. That
he goes by another name, but do not disguise himself, nor deny himself
to any man that challenges him. He tells me, for certain, that offers
had been made to the old man, of marriage between the King and his
daughter, to have obliged him, but he would not.

     [The Protector wished the Duke of Buckingham to marry his daughter
     Frances.  She married, 1. Robert Rich, grandson and heir to Robert,
     Earl of Warwick, on November 11th, 1657, who died in the following
     February;  2. Sir John Russell, Bart.  She died January 27th,
     1721-22, aged eighty-four. In T. Morrice's life of Roger, Earl of
     Orrery, prefixed to Orrery's "State Letters" (Dublin, 1743, vol.
     i., p. 40), there is a circumstantial account of an interview
     between Orrery (then Lord Broghill) and Cromwell, in which the
     former suggested to the latter that Charles II. should marry Frances
     Cromwell.  Cromwell gave great attention to the reasons urged, "but
     walking two or three turns, and pondering with himself, he told Lord
     Broghill the king would never forgive him the death of his father.
     His lordship desired him to employ somebody to sound the king in
     this matter, to see how he would take it, and offered himself to
     mediate in it for him. But Cromwell would not consent, but again
     repeated, 'The king cannot and will not forgive the death of his
     father;' and so he left his lordship, who durst not tell him he had
     already dealt with his majesty in that affair.  Upon this my lord
     withdrew, and meeting Cromwell's wife and daughter, they inquired
     how he had succeeded; of which having given them an account, he
     added they must try their interest in him, but none could prevail."]

He thinks (with me) that it never was in his power to bring in the King
with the consent of any of his officers about him; and that he scorned
to bring him in as Monk did, to secure himself and deliver every body
else. When I told him of what I found writ in a French book of one
Monsieur Sorbiere, that gives an account of his observations herein
England; among other things he says, that it is reported that Cromwell
did, in his life-time, transpose many of the bodies of the Kings of
England from one grave to another, and that by that means it is not
known certainly whether the head that is now set up upon a post be that
of Cromwell, or of one of the Kings; Mr. White tells me that he believes
he never had so poor a low thought in him to trouble himself about it.
He says the hand of God is much to be seen; that all his children are
in good condition enough as to estate, and that their relations that
betrayed their family are all now either hanged or very miserable.

14th. Up by break of day, and got to Brampton by three o'clock, where my
father and mother overjoyed to see me, my mother, ready to weepe every
time she looked upon me. After dinner my father and I to the Court, and
there did all our business to my mind, as I have set down in a paper
particularly expressing our proceedings at this court. So home, where W.
Joyce full of talk and pleased with his journey, and after supper I to
bed and left my father, mother, and him laughing.

15th. My father and I up and walked alone to Hinchingbroke; and among
the other late chargeable works that my Lord hath done there, we saw
his water-works and the Oral which is very fine; and so is the house all
over, but I am sorry to think of the money at this time spent
therein. Back to my father's (Mr. Sheply being out of town) and there
breakfasted, after making an end with Barton about his businesses,
and then my mother called me into the garden, and there but all to no
purpose desiring me to be friends with John, but I told her I cannot,
nor indeed easily shall, which afflicted the poor woman, but I cannot
help it. Then taking leave, W. Joyce and I set out, calling T. Trice at
Bugden, and thence got by night to Stevenage, and there mighty merry,
though I in bed more weary than the other two days, which, I think,
proceeded from our galloping so much, my other weariness being almost
all over; but I find that a coney skin in my breeches preserves me
perfectly from galling, and that eating after I come to my Inne, without
drinking, do keep me from being stomach sick, which drink do presently
make me. We lay all in several beds in the same room, and W. Joyce full
of his impertinent tricks and talk, which then made us merry, as any
other fool would have done. So to sleep.

16th (Lord's day). It raining, we set out, and about nine o'clock got
to Hatfield in church-time; and I 'light and saw my simple Lord Salsbury
sit there in his gallery. Staid not in the Church, but thence mounted
again and to Barnett by the end of sermon, and there dined at the Red
Lyon very weary again, but all my weariness yesterday night and to-day
in my thighs only, the rest of my weariness in my shoulders and arms
being quite gone. Thence home, parting company at my cozen Anth.
Joyce's, by four o'clock, weary, but very well, to bed at home, where I
find all well. Anon my wife came to bed, but for my ease rose again and
lay with her woman.

17th. Rose very well and not weary, and with Sir W. Batten to St.
James's; there did our business. I saw Sir J. Lawson since his return
from sea first this morning, and hear that my Lord Sandwich is come from
Portsmouth to town. Thence I to him, and finding him at my Lord Crew's,
I went with him home to his house and much kind discourse. Thence my
Lord to Court, and I with Creed to the 'Change, and thence with Sir W.
Warren to a cook's shop and dined, discoursing and advising him about
his great contract he is to make tomorrow, and do every day receive
great satisfaction in his company, and a prospect of a just advantage
by his friendship. Thence to my office doing some business, but it being
very cold, I, for fear of getting cold, went early home to bed, my wife
not being come home from my Lady Jemimah, with whom she hath been at a
play and at Court to-day.

18th. Up and to the office, where among other things we made a very
great contract with Sir W. Warren for 3,000 loade of timber. At noon
dined at home. In the afternoon to the Fishery, where, very confused and
very ridiculous, my Lord Craven's proceedings, especially his finding
fault with Sir J. Collaton and Colonell Griffin's' report in the
accounts of the lottery-men. Thence I with Mr. Gray in his coach to
White Hall, but the King and Duke being abroad, we returned to Somersett
House. In discourse I find him a very worthy and studious gentleman in
the business of trade, and among-other things he observed well to me,
how it is not the greatest wits, but the steady man, that is a good
merchant: he instanced in Ford and Cocke, the last of whom he values
above all men as his oracle, as Mr. Coventry do Mr. Jolliffe. He says
that it is concluded among merchants, that where a trade hath once
been and do decay, it never recovers again, and therefore that the
manufacture of cloath of England will never come to esteem again; that,
among other faults, Sir Richard Ford cannot keepe a secret, and that it
is so much the part of a merchant to be guilty of that fault that the
Duke of Yoke is resolved to commit no more secrets to the merchants
of the Royall Company; that Sir Ellis Layton is, for a speech of forty
words, the wittiest man that ever he knew in his life, but longer he is
nothing, his judgment being nothing at all, but his wit most absolute.
At Somersett House he carried me in, and there I saw the Queene's new
rooms, which are most stately and nobly furnished; and there I saw her,
and the Duke of Yorke and Duchesse were there. The Duke espied me, and
came to me, and talked with me a very great while about our contract
this day with Sir W. Warren, and among other things did with some
contempt ask whether we did except Polliards, which Sir W. Batten did
yesterday (in spite, as the Duke I believe by my Lord Barkely do well
enough know) among other things in writing propose. Thence home by
coach, it raining hard, and to my office, where late, then home to
supper and to bed. This night the Dutch Embassador desired and had an
audience of the King. What the issue of it was I know not. Both sides
I believe desire peace, but neither will begin, and so I believe a warr
will follow. The Prince is with his fleet at Portsmouth, and the Dutch
are making all preparations for warr.

19th. Up and to my office all the morning. At noon dined at home;
then abroad by coach to buy for the office "Herne upon the Statute of
Charitable Uses," in order to the doing something better in the Chest
than we have done, for I am ashamed to see Sir W. Batten possess himself
so long of so much money as he hath done. Coming home, weighed, my two
silver flaggons at Stevens's. They weigh 212 oz. 27 dwt., which is about
L50, at 5s. per oz., and then they judge the fashion to be worth above
5s. per oz. more--nay, some say 10s. an ounce the fashion. But I do not
believe, but yet am sorry to see that the fashion is worth so much, and
the silver come to no more. So home and to my office, where very busy
late. My wife at Mercer's mother's, I believe, W. Hewer with them, which
I do not like, that he should ask my leave to go about business, and
then to go and spend his time in sport, and leave me here busy. To
supper and to bed, my wife coming in by and by, which though I know
there was no hurt in it; I do not like.

20th. Up and to the office, where all the morning. At noon my uncle
Thomas came, dined with me, and received some money of me. Then I to
my office, where I took in with me Bagwell's wife, and there I caressed
her, and find her every day more and more coming with good words and
promises of getting her husband a place, which I will do. So we parted,
and I to my Lord Sandwich at his lodgings, and after a little stay
away with Mr. Cholmely to Fleete Streete; in the way he telling me that
Tangier is like to be in a bad condition with this same Fitzgerald,
he being a man of no honour, nor presence, nor little honesty, and
endeavours: to raise the Irish and suppress the English interest there;
and offend every body, and do nothing that I hear of well, which I am
sorry for. Thence home, by the way taking two silver tumblers home,
which I have bought, and so home, and there late busy at my office, and
then home to supper and to bed.

21st. Up and by coach to Mr. Cole's, and there conferred with him about
some law business, and so to Sir W. Turner's, and there bought my cloth,
coloured, for a suit and cloake, to line with plush the cloak, which
will cost me money, but I find that I must go handsomely, whatever it
costs me, and the charge will be made up in the fruit it brings. Thence
to the Coffee-house and 'Change, and so home to dinner, and then to the
office all the afternoon, whither comes W. Howe to see me, being come
from, and going presently back to sea with my Lord. Among other things
he tells me Mr. Creed is much out of favour with my Lord from his
freedom of talke and bold carriage, and other things with which my Lord
is not pleased, but most I doubt his not lending my Lord money, and Mr.
Moore's reporting what his answer was I doubt in the worst manner. But,
however, a very unworthy rogue he is, and, therefore, let him go for one
good for nothing, though wise to the height above most men I converse
with. In the evening (W. Howe being gone) comes Mr. Martin, to trouble
me again to get him a Lieutenant's place for which he is as fit as a
foole can be. But I put him off like an arse, as he is, and so setting
my papers and books in order: I home to supper and to bed.

22nd. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning. At noon comes
my uncle Thomas and his daughter Mary about getting me to pay them the
L30 due now, but payable in law to her husband. I did give them the
best answer I could, and so parted, they not desiring to stay to dinner.
After dinner I down to Deptford, and there did business, and so back to
my office, where very late busy, and so home to supper and to bed.

23rd (Lord's day). Up and to church. At noon comes unexpected Mr.
Fuller, the minister, and dines with me, and also I had invited Mr.
Cooper with one I judge come from sea, and he and I spent the whole
afternoon together, he teaching me some things in understanding of
plates. At night to the office, doing business, and then home to supper.
Then a psalm, to prayers, and to bed.

24th. Up and in Sir J. Minnes' coach (alone with Mrs. Turner as far as
Paternoster Row, where I set her down) to St. James's, and there did our
business, and I had the good lucke to speak what pleased the Duke about
our great contract in hand with Sir W. Warren against Sir W. Batten,
wherein the Duke is very earnest for our contracting. Thence home to the
office till noon, and then dined and to the 'Change and off with Sir W.
Warren for a while, consulting about managing his contract. Thence to a
Committee at White Hall of Tangier, where I had the good lucke to speak
something to very good purpose about the Mole at Tangier, which was
well received even by Sir J. Lawson and Mr. Cholmely, the undertakers,
against whose interest I spoke; that I believe I shall be valued for
it. Thence into the galleries to talk with my Lord Sandwich; among other
things, about the Prince's writing up to tell us of the danger he and
his fleete lie in at Portsmouth, of receiving affronts from the Dutch;
which, my Lord said, he would never have done, had he lain there with
one ship alone: nor is there any great reason for it, because of the
sands. However, the fleete will be ordered to go and lay themselves up
at the Cowes. Much beneath the prowesse of the Prince, I think, and the
honour of the nation, at the first to be found to secure themselves. My
Lord is well pleased to think, that, if the Duke and the Prince go,
all the blame of any miscarriage will not light on him; and that if any
thing goes well, he hopes he shall have the share of the glory, for the
Prince is by no means well esteemed of by any body. Thence home, and
though not very well yet up late about the Fishery business, wherein I
hope to give an account how I find the Collections to have been managed,
which I did finish to my great content, and so home to supper and to
bed. This day the great O'Neale died; I believe, to the content of all
the Protestant pretenders in Ireland.

25th. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and finished
Sir W. Warren's great contract for timber, with great content to me,
because just in the terms I wrote last night to Sir W. Warren and
against the terms proposed by Sir W. Batten. At noon home to dinner,
and there found Creed and Hawley. After dinner comes in Mrs. Ingram, the
first time to make a visit to my wife. After a little stay I left them
and to the Committee of the Fishery, and there did make my report of the
late public collections for the Fishery, much to the satisfaction of the
Committee, and I think much to my reputation, for good notice was taken
of it and much it was commended. So home, in my way taking care of a
piece of plate for Mr. Christopher Pett, against the launching of his
new great ship tomorrow at Woolwich, which I singly did move to His
Royall Highness, and did obtain it for him, to the value of twenty
pieces. And he, under his hand, do acknowledge to me that he did never
receive so great a kindness from any man in the world as from me herein.
So to my office, and then to supper, and then to my office again, where
busy late, being very full now a days of business to my great content,
I thank God, and so home to bed, my house being full of a design, to go
to-morrow, my wife and all her servants, to see the new ship launched.

26th. Up, my people rising mighty betimes, to fit themselves to go by
water; and my boy, he could not sleep, but wakes about four o'clock,
and in bed lay playing on his lute till daylight, and, it seems, did the
like last night till twelve o'clock. About eight o'clock, my wife, she
and her woman, and Besse and Jane, and W. Hewer and the boy, to the
water-side, and there took boat, and by and by I out of doors, to look
after the flaggon, to get it ready to carry to Woolwich. That being not
ready, I stepped aside and found out Nellson, he that Whistler buys his
bewpers of, and did there buy 5 pieces at their price, and am in hopes
thereby to bring them down or buy ourselves all we spend of Nellson at
the first hand. This jobb was greatly to my content, and by and by the
flaggon being finished at the burnisher's, I home, and there fitted
myself, and took a hackney-coach I hired, it being a very cold and
foule day, to Woolwich, all the way reading in a good book touching the
fishery, and that being done, in the book upon the statute of charitable
uses, mightily to my satisfaction. At Woolwich; I there up to the King
and Duke, and they liked the plate well. Here I staid above with them
while the ship was launched, which was done with great success, and the
King did very much like the ship, saying, she had the best bow that
ever he saw. But, Lord! the sorry talke and discourse among the great
courtiers round about him, without any reverence in the world, but with
so much disorder. By and by the Queene comes and her Mayds of Honour;
one whereof, Mrs. Boynton, and the Duchesse of Buckingham, had been very
siclee coming by water in the barge (the water being very rough); but
what silly sport they made with them in very common terms, methought,
was very poor, and below what people think these great people say and
do. The launching being done, the King and company went down to take
barge; and I sent for Mr. Pett, and put the flaggon into the Duke's
hand, and he, in the presence of the King, did give it, Mr. Pett taking
it upon his knee. This Mr. Pett is wholly beholding to me for, and he
do know and I believe will acknowledge it. Thence I to Mr. Ackworth, and
there eat and drank with Commissioner Pett and his wife, and thence to
Shelden's, where Sir W. Batten and his Lady were. By and by I took coach
after I had enquired for my wife or her boat, but found none. Going out
of the gate, an ordinary woman prayed me to give her room to London,
which I did, but spoke not to her all the way, but read, as long as I
could see, my book again. Dark when we came to London, and a stop of
coaches in Southwarke. I staid above half an houre and then 'light, and
finding Sir W. Batten's coach, heard they were gone into the Beare at
the Bridge foot, and thither I to them. Presently the stop is removed,
and then going out to find my coach, I could not find it, for it was
gone with the rest; so I fair to go through the darke and dirt over
the bridge, and my leg fell in a hole broke on the bridge, but, the
constable standing there to keep people from it, I was catched up,
otherwise I had broke my leg; for which mercy the Lord be praised! So at
Fanchurch I found my coach staying for me, and so home, where the little
girle hath looked to the house well, but no wife come home, which made
me begin to fear [for] her, the water being very rough, and cold and
darke. But by and by she and her company come in all well, at which I
was glad, though angry. Thence I to Sir W. Batten's, and there sat late
with him, Sir R. Ford, and Sir John Robinson; the last of whom continues
still the same foole he was, crying up what power he has in the City,
in knowing their temper, and being able to do what he will with them. It
seems the City did last night very freely lend the King L100,000
without any security but the King's word, which was very noble. But this
loggerhead and Sir R. Ford would make us believe that they did it. Now
Sir R. Ford is a cunning man, and makes a foole of the other, and the
other believes whatever the other tells him. But, Lord! to think that
such a man should be Lieutenant of the Tower, and so great a man as he
is, is a strange thing to me. With them late and then home and with my
wife to bed, after supper.

27th. Up and to the office, where all the morning busy. At noon, Sir
G. Carteret, Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, Sir W. Pen, and myself, were
treated at the Dolphin by Mr. Foly, the ironmonger, where a good plain
dinner, but I expected musique, the missing of which spoiled my dinner,
only very good merry discourse at dinner. Thence with Sir G. Carteret
by coach to White Hall to a Committee of Tangier, and thence back to
London, and 'light in Cheapside and I to Nellson's, and there met with
a rub at first, but took him out to drink, and there discoursed to my
great content so far with him that I think I shall agree with him for
Bewpers to serve the Navy with. So with great content home and to my
office, where late, and having got a great cold in my head yesterday
home to supper and to bed.

28th. Slept ill all night, having got a very great cold the other day at
Woolwich in [my] head, which makes me full of snot. Up in the morning,
and my tailor brings me home my fine, new, coloured cloth suit, my
cloake lined with plush, as good a suit as ever I wore in my life,
and mighty neat, to my great content. To my office, and there all
the morning. At noon to Nellson's, and there bought 20 pieces more of
Bewpers, and hope to go on with him to a contract. Thence to the 'Change
a little, and thence home with Luellin to dinner, where Mr. Deane met
me by appointment, and after dinner he and I up to my chamber, and
there hard at discourse, and advising him what to do in his business at
Harwich, and then to discourse of our old business of ships and taking
new rules of him to my great pleasure, and he being gone I to my office
a little, and then to see Sir W. Batten, who is sick of a greater cold
than I, and thither comes to me Mr. Holliard, and into the chamber to
me, and, poor man (beyond all I ever saw of him), was a little drunk,
and there sat talking and finding acquaintance with Sir W. Batten and my
Lady by relations on both sides, that there we staid very long. At last
broke up, and he home much overcome with drink, but well enough to get
well home. So I home to supper and to bed.

29th. Up, and it being my Lord Mayor's show, my boy and three mayds went
out; but it being a very foule, rainy day, from morning till night, I
was sorry my wife let them go out. All the morning at the office.
At dinner at home. In the afternoon to the office again, and about 9
o'clock by appointment to the King's Head tavern upon Fish Street Hill,
whither Mr. Wolfe (and Parham by his means) met me to discourse about
the Fishery, and great light I had by Parham, who is a little conceited,
but a very knowing man in his way, and in the general fishing trade of
England. Here I staid three hours, and eat a barrel of very fine oysters
of Wolfe's giving me, and so, it raining hard, home and to my office,
and then home to bed. All the talke is that De Ruyter is come over-land
home with six or eight of his captaines to command here at home, and
their ships kept abroad in the Straights; which sounds as if they had a
mind to do something with us.

30th (Lord's day). Up, and this morning put on my new, fine, coloured
cloth suit, with my cloake lined with plush, which is a dear and noble
suit, costing me about L17. To church, and then home to dinner, and
after dinner to a little musique with my boy, and so to church with my
wife, and so home, and with her all the evening reading and at musique
with my boy with great pleasure, and so to supper, prayers, and to bed.

31st. Very busy all the morning, at noon Creed to me and dined with me,
and then he and I to White Hall, there to a Committee of Tangier, where
it is worth remembering when Mr. Coventry proposed the retrenching
some of the charge of the horse, the first word asked by the Duke of
Albemarle was, "Let us see who commands them," there being three troops.
One of them he calls to mind was by Sir Toby Bridges. "Oh!" says he,
"there is a very good man. If you must reform

     [Reform, i.e.  disband.  See "Memoirs of Sir John Reresby,"
     September 2nd, 1651.  "A great many younger brothers and reformed
     officers of the King's army depended upon him for their meat and
     drink."  So reformado, a discharged or disbanded officer.--M. B.]

two of them, be sure let him command the troop that is left." Thence
home, and there came presently to me Mr. Young and Whistler, who find
that I have quite overcome them in their business of flags, and now they
come to intreat my favour, but I will be even with them. So late to
my office and there till past one in the morning making up my month's
accounts, and find that my expense this month in clothes has kept me
from laying up anything; but I am no worse, but a little better than I
was, which is L1205, a great sum, the Lord be praised for it! So home
to bed, with my mind full of content therein, and vexed for my being so
angry in bad words to my wife to-night, she not giving me a good account
of her layings out to my mind to-night. This day I hear young Mr.
Stanly, a brave young [gentleman], that went out with young Jermin,
with Prince Rupert, is already dead of the small-pox, at Portsmouth. All
preparations against the Dutch; and the Duke of Yorke fitting himself
with all speed, to go to the fleete which is hastening for him; being
now resolved to go in the Charles.




NOVEMBER 1664

November 1st. Up and to the office, where busy all the morning, at noon
(my wife being invited to my Lady Sandwich's) all alone dined at home
upon a good goose with Mr. Wayth, discussing of business. Thence I
to the Committee of the Fishery, and there we sat with several good
discourses and some bad and simple ones, and with great disorder, and
yet by the men of businesse of the towne. But my report in the
business of the collections is mightily commended and will get me some
reputation, and indeed is the only thing looks like a thing well done
since we sat. Then with Mr. Parham to the tavern, but I drank no wine,
only he did give me another barrel of oysters, and he brought one Major
Greene, an able fishmonger, and good discourse to my information. So
home and late at business at my office. Then to supper and to bed.

2nd. Up betimes, and down with Mr. Castle to Redriffe, and there walked
to Deptford to view a parcel of brave knees--[Knees of timber]--of
his, which indeed are very good, and so back again home, I seeming very
friendly to him, though I know him to be a rogue, and one that hates
me with his heart. Home and to dinner, and so to my office all the
afternoon, where in some pain in my backe, which troubled me, but I
think it comes only with stooping, and from no other matter. At night
to Nellson's, and up and down about business, and so home to my office,
then home to supper and to bed.

3rd. Up and to the office, where strange to see how Sir W. Pen is
flocked to by people of all sorts against his going to sea. At the
office did much business, among other an end of that that has troubled
me long, the business of the bewpers and flags. At noon to the 'Change,
and thence by appointment was met with Bagwell's wife, and she followed
me into Moorfields, and there into a drinking house, and all alone eat
and drank together. I did there caress her, but though I did make some
offer did not receive any compliance from her in what was bad, but very
modestly she denied me, which I was glad to see and shall value her the
better for it, and I hope never tempt her to any evil more. Thence back
to the town, and we parted and I home, and then at the office late,
where Sir W. Pen came to take his leave of me, being to-morrow, which is
very sudden to us, to go on board to lie on board, but I think will come
ashore again before the ship, the Charles,

     ["The Royal Charles" was the Duke of York's ship, and Sir William
     Penn, who hoisted his flag in the "Royal James" on November 8th,
     shifted to the "Royal Charles" on November 30th.  The duke gave Penn
     the command of the fleet immediately under himself.  On Penn's
     monument he is styled "Great Captain Commander under His Royal
     Highness" (Penn's "Memorials of Sir William Penn," vol. ii.,
     p. 296).]

can go away. So home to supper and to bed. This night Sir W. Batten did,
among other things, tell me strange newes, which troubles me, that my
Lord Sandwich will be sent Governor to Tangier, which, in some respects,
indeed, I should be glad of, for the good of the place and the safety
of his person; but I think his honour will suffer, and, it may be, his
interest fail by his distance.

4th. Waked very betimes and lay long awake, my mind being so full of
business. Then up and to St. James's, where I find Mr. Coventry full
of business, packing up for his going to sea with the Duke. Walked with
him, talking, to White Hall, where to the Duke's lodgings, who is gone
thither to lodge lately. I appeared to the Duke, and thence Mr. Coventry
and I an hour in the Long Gallery, talking about the management of our
office, he tells me the weight of dispatch will lie chiefly on me, and
told me freely his mind touching Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes, the
latter of whom, he most aptly said, was like a lapwing; that all he did
was to keepe a flutter, to keepe others from the nest that they would
find. He told me an old story of the former about the light-houses, how
just before he had certified to the Duke against the use of them, and
what a burden they are to trade, and presently after, at his being at
Harwich, comes to desire that he might have the setting one up there,
and gets the usefulness of it certified also by the Trinity House. After
long discoursing and considering all our stores and other things, as how
the King hath resolved upon Captain Taylor

     [Coventry, writing to Secretary Bennet (November 14th, 1664), refers
     to the objections made to Taylor, and adds: "Thinks the King will
     not easily consent to his rejection, as he is a man of great
     abilities and dispatch, and was formerly laid aside at Chatham on
     the Duchess of Albemarle's earnest interposition for another.  He is
     a fanatic, it is true, but all hands will be needed for the work cut
     out; there is less danger of them in harbour than at sea, and profit
     will convert most of them" ("Calendar of State Papers," Domestic,
     1664-65, p. 68).]

and Colonell Middleton, the first to be Commissioner for Harwich and the
latter for Portsmouth, I away to the 'Change, and there did very
much business, so home to dinner, and Mr. Duke, our Secretary for the
Fishery, dined with me. After dinner to discourse of our business, much
to my content, and then he away, and I by water among the smiths on
the other side, and to the alehouse with one and was near buying 4 or 5
anchors, and learned something worth my knowing of them, and so home
and to my office, where late, with my head very full of business, and so
away home to supper and to bed.

5th. Up and to the office, where all the morning, at noon to the
'Change, and thence home to dinner, and so with my wife to the Duke's
house to a play, "Macbeth," a pretty good play, but admirably acted.
Thence home; the coach being forced to go round by London Wall home,
because of the bonefires; the day being mightily observed in the City.
To my office late at business, and then home to supper, and to bed.

6th (Lord's day). Up and with my wife to church. Dined at home. And
I all the afternoon close at my office drawing up some proposals to
present to the Committee for the Fishery to-morrow, having a great
good intention to be serviceable in the business if I can. At night, to
supper with my uncle Wight, where very merry, and so home. To prayers
and to bed.

7th. Up and with Sir W. Batten to White Hall, where mighty thrusting
about the Duke now upon his going. We were with him long. He advised us
to follow our business close, and to be directed in his absence by
the Committee of the Councell for the Navy. By and by a meeting of the
Fishery, where the Duke was, but in such haste, and things looked so
superficially over, that I had not a fit opportunity to propose my paper
that I wrote yesterday, but I had chewed it to Mr. Gray and Wren before,
who did like it most highly, as they said, and I think they would not
dissemble in that manner in a business of this nature, but I see the
greatest businesses are done so superficially that I wonder anything
succeeds at all among us, that is publique. Thence somewhat vexed to
see myself frustrated in the good I hoped to have done and a little
reputation to have gained, and thence to my barber's, but Jane not being
in the way I to my Lady Sandwich's, and there met my wife and dined, but
I find that I dine as well myself, that is, as neatly, and my meat as
good and well-dressed, as my good Lady do, in the absence of my Lord.
Thence by water I to my barber's again, and did meet in the street my
Jane, but could not talk with her, but only a word or two, and so by
coach called my wife, and home, where at my office late, and then, it
being washing day, to supper and to bed.

8th. Up and to the office, where by and by Mr. Coventry come, and after
doing a little business, took his leave of us, being to go to sea with
the Duke to-morrow. At noon, I and Sir J. Minnes and Lord Barkeley (who
with Sir J. Duncum, and Mr. Chichly, are made Masters of the Ordnance),
to the office of the Ordnance, to discourse about wadding for guns.
Thence to dinner, all of us to the Lieutenant's of the Tower; where a
good dinner, but disturbed in the middle of it by the King's coming
into the Tower: and so we broke up, and to him, and went up and down
the store-houses and magazines; which are, with the addition of the
new great store-house, a noble sight. He gone, I to my office, where
Bagwell's wife staid for me, and together with her a good while, to meet
again shortly. So all the afternoon at my office till late, and then to
bed, joyed in my love and ability to follow my business. This day, Mr.
Lever sent my wife a pair of silver candlesticks, very pretty ones. The
first man that ever presented me, to whom I have not only done little
service, but apparently did him the greatest disservice in his business
of accounts, as Purser-Generall, of any man at the board.

9th. Called up, as I had appointed, by H. Russell, between two and three
o'clock, and I and my boy Tom by water with a gally down to the Hope, it
being a fine starry night. Got thither by eight o'clock, and there, as
expected, found the Charles, her mainmast setting. Commissioner Pett
aboard. I up and down to see the ship I was so well acquainted with,
and a great worke it is, the setting so great a mast. Thence the
Commissioner and I on board Sir G. Ascue, in the Henery, who lacks men
mightily, which makes me think that there is more believed to be in
a man that hath heretofore been employed than truly there is; for one
would never have thought, a month ago, that he would have wanted 1000
men at his heels. Nor do I think he hath much of a seaman in him: for
he told me, says he, "Heretofore, we used to find our ships clear and
ready, everything to our hands in the Downes. Now I come, and must look
to see things done like a slave, things that I never minded, nor
cannot look after." And by his discourse I find that he hath not minded
anything in her at all. Thence not staying, the wind blowing hard, I
made use of the Jemmy yacht and returned to the Tower in her, my boy
being a very droll boy and good company. Home and eat something, and
then shifted myself, and to White Hall, and there the King being in his
Cabinet Council (I desiring to speak with Sir G. Carteret), I was called
in, and demanded by the King himself many questions, to which I did
give him full answers. There were at this Council my Lord Chancellor,
Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Treasurer, the two Secretarys, and Sir G.
Carteret. Not a little contented at this chance of being made known to
these persons, and called often by my name by the King, I to Mr. Pierces
to take leave of him, but he not within, but saw her and made very
little stay, but straight home to my office, where I did business, and
then to supper and to bed. The Duke of York is this day gone away to
Portsmouth.

10th. Up, and not finding my things ready, I was so angry with Besse as
to bid my wife for good and all to bid her provide herself a place,
for though she be very good-natured, she hath no care nor memory of her
business at all. So to the office, where vexed at the malice of Sir
W. Batten and folly of Sir J. Minnes against Sir W. Warren, but I
prevented, and shall do, though to my own disquiet and trouble. At
noon dined with Sir W. Batten and the Auditors of the Exchequer at
the Dolphin by Mr. Wayth's desire, and after dinner fell to business
relating to Sir G. Carteret's account, and so home to the office, where
Sir W. Batten begins, too fast, to shew his knavish tricks in giving
what price he pleases for commodities. So abroad, intending to have
spoke with my Lord Chancellor about the old business of his wood at
Clarendon, but could not, and so home again, and late at my office, and
then home to supper and bed. My little girle Susan is fallen sicke of
the meazles, we fear, or, at least, of a scarlett feavour.

11th. Up, and with Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten to the Council
Chamber at White Hall, to the Committee of the Lords for the Navy, where
we were made to wait an houre or two before called in. In that time
looking upon some books of heraldry of Sir Edward Walker's making, which
are very fine, there I observed the Duke of Monmouth's armes are neatly
done, and his title, "The most noble and high-born Prince, James Scott,
Duke of Monmouth, &c.;" nor could Sir J. Minnes, nor any body there,
tell whence he should take the name of Scott? And then I found my Lord
Sandwich, his title under his armes is, "The most noble and mighty Lord,
Edward, Earl of Sandwich, &c." Sir Edward Walker afterwards coming in,
in discourse did say that there was none of the families of princes in
Christendom that do derive themselves so high as Julius Caesar, nor
so far by 1000 years, that can directly prove their rise; only some in
Germany do derive themselves from the patrician familys of Rome, but
that uncertainly; and, among other things, did much inveigh against
the writing of romances, that 500 years hence being wrote of matters in
general, true as the romance of Cleopatra, the world will not know which
is the true and which the false. Here was a gentleman attending here
that told us he saw the other day (and did bring the draught of it
to Sir Francis Prigeon) of a monster born of an hostler's wife at
Salisbury, two women children perfectly made, joyned at the lower part
of their bellies, and every part perfect as two bodies, and only one
payre of legs coming forth on one side from the middle where they
were joined. It was alive 24 hours, and cried and did as all hopefull
children do; but, being showed too much to people, was killed. By and by
we were called in, where a great many lords: Annesly in the chair. But,
Lord! to see what work they will make us, and what trouble we shall have
to inform men in a business they are to begin to know, when the greatest
of our hurry is, is a thing to be lamented; and I fear the consequence
will be bad to us. Thence I by coach to the 'Change, and thence home
to dinner, my head akeing mightily with much business. Our little girl
better than she was yesterday. After dinner out again by coach to my
Lord Chancellor's, but could not speak with him, then up and down to
seek Sir Ph. Warwicke, Sir G. Carteret, and my Lord Berkely, but failed
in all, and so home and there late at business. Among other things Mr.
Turner making his complaint to me how my clerks do all the worke and get
all the profit, and he hath no comfort, nor cannot subsist, I did make
him apprehend how he is beholding to me more than to any body for my
suffering him to act as Pourveyour of petty provisions, and told him
so largely my little value of any body's favour, that I believe he will
make no complaints again a good while. So home to supper and to bed,
after prayers, and having my boy and Mercer give me some, each of them
some, musique.

12th. Up, being frighted that Mr. Coventry was come to towne and now at
the office, so I run down without eating or drinking or washing to the
office and it proved my Lord Berkeley. There all the morning, at noon to
the 'Change, and so home to dinner, Mr. Wayth with me, and then to the
office, where mighty busy till very late, but I bless God I go through
with it very well and hope I shall.

13th (Lord's day). This morning to church, where mighty sport, to hear
our clerke sing out of tune, though his master sits by him that begins
and keeps the tune aloud for the parish. Dined at home very well, and
spent all the afternoon with my wife within doors, and getting a speech
out of Hamlett, "To bee or not to bee,"' without book. In the evening to
sing psalms, and in come Mr. Hill to see me, and then he and I and the
boy finely to sing, and so anon broke up after much pleasure, he gone I
to supper, and so prayers and to bed.

14th. Up, and with Sir W. Batten to White Hall, to the Lords of the
Admiralty, and there did our business betimes. Thence to Sir Philip
Warwicke about Navy business: and my Lord Ashly; and afterwards to my
Lord Chancellor, who is very well pleased with me, and my carrying of
his business. And so to the 'Change, where mighty busy; and so home
to dinner, where Mr. Creed and Moore: and after dinner I to my Lord
Treasurer's, to Sir Philip Warwicke there, and then to White Hall,
to the Duke of Albemarle, about Tangier; and then homeward to the
Coffee-house to hear newes. And it seems the Dutch, as I afterwards
found by Mr. Coventry's letters, have stopped a ship of masts of Sir W.
Warren's, coming for us in a Swede's ship, which they will not release
upon Sir G. Downing's claiming her: which appears as the first act of
hostility; and is looked upon as so by Mr. Coventry. The Elias,' coming
from New England (Captain Hill, commander), is sunk; only the captain
and a few men saved. She foundered in the sea. So home, where infinite
busy till 12 at night, and so home to supper and to bed.

15th. That I might not be too fine for the business I intend this day, I
did leave off my fine new cloth suit lined with plush and put on my
poor black suit, and after office done (where much business, but
little done), I to the 'Change, and thence Bagwell's wife with much
ado followed me through Moorfields to a blind alehouse, and there I did
caress her and eat and drink, and many hard looks and sooth the poor
wretch did give me, and I think verily was troubled at what I did, but
at last after many protestings by degrees I did arrive at what I would,
with great pleasure, and then in the evening, it raining, walked into
town to where she knew where she was, and then I took coach and to White
Hall to a Committee of Tangier, where, and every where else, I thank
God, I find myself growing in repute; and so home, and late, very late,
at business, nobody minding it but myself, and so home to bed, weary and
full of thoughts. Businesses grow high between the Dutch and us on every
side.

16th. My wife not being well, waked in the night, and strange to see how
dead sleep our people sleep that she was fain to ring an hour before any
body would wake. At last one rose and helped my wife, and so to sleep
again. Up and to my business, and then to White Hall, there to attend
the Lords Commissioners, and so directly home and dined with Sir W.
Batten and my Lady, and after dinner had much discourse tending to
profit with Sir W. Batten, how to get ourselves into the prize office

     [The Calendars of State Papers are full of references to
     applications for Commissionerships of the Prize Office.  In
     December, 1664, the Navy Committee appointed themselves the
     Commissioners for Prize Goods, Sir Henry Bennet being appointed
     comptroller, and Lord Ashley treasurer.]

or some other fair way of obliging the King to consider us in our
extraordinary pains. Then to the office, and there all the afternoon
very busy, and so till past 12 at night, and so home to bed. This day my
wife went to the burial of a little boy of W. Joyce's.

17th. Up and to my office, and there all the morning mighty busy, and
taking upon me to tell the Comptroller how ill his matters were done,
and I think indeed if I continue thus all the business of the office
will come upon me whether I will or no. At noon to the 'Change, and then
home with Creed to dinner, and thence I to the office, where close at it
all the afternoon till 12 at night, and then home to supper and to bed.
This day I received from Mr. Foley, but for me to pay for it, if I like
it, an iron chest, having now received back some money I had laid out
for the King, and I hope to have a good sum of money by me, thereby, in
a few days, I think above L800. But when I come home at night, I could
not find the way to open it; but, which is a strange thing, my little
girle Susan could carry it alone from one table clear from the ground
and set upon another, when neither I nor anyone in my house but Jane the
cook-mayde could do it.

18th. Up and to the office, and thence to the Committee of the Fishery
at White Hall, where so poor simple doings about the business of the
Lottery, that I was ashamed to see it, that a thing so low and base
should have any thing to do with so noble an undertaking. But I had the
advantage this day to hear Mr. Williamson discourse, who come to be a
contractor with others for the Lotterys, and indeed I find he is a very
logicall man and a good speaker. But it was so pleasant to see my Lord
Craven, the chaireman, before many persons of worth and grave, use this
comparison in saying that certainly these that would contract for all
the lotteries would not suffer us to set up the Virginia lottery for
plate before them, "For," says he, "if I occupy a wench first, you may
occupy her again your heart out you can never have her maidenhead after
I have once had it," which he did more loosely, and yet as if he had
fetched a most grave and worthy instance. They made mirth, but I and
others were ashamed of it. Thence to the 'Change and thence home to
dinner, and thence to the office a good while, and thence to the Council
chamber at White Hall to speake with Sir G. Carteret, and here by
accident heard a great and famous cause between Sir G. Lane and one
Mr. Phill. Whore, an Irish business about Sir G. Lane's endeavouring to
reverse a decree of the late Commissioners of Ireland in a Rebells case
for his land, which the King had given as forfeited to Sir G. Lane,
for whom the Sollicitor did argue most angell like, and one of the
Commissioners, Baron, did argue for the other and for himself and
his brethren who had decreed it. But the Sollicitor do so pay the
Commissioners, how four all along did act for the Papists, and three
only for the Protestants, by which they were overvoted, but at last
one word (which was omitted in the Sollicitor's repeating of an Act
of Parliament in the case) being insisted on by the other part, the
Sollicitor was put to a great stop, and I could discern he could not
tell what to say, but was quite out. Thence home well pleased with this
accident, and so home to my office, where late, and then to supper and
to bed. This day I had a letter from Mr. Coventry, that tells me that
my Lord Brunkard is to be one of our Commissioners, of which I am very
glad, if any more must be.

19th. All the morning at the office, and without dinner down by galley
up and down the river to visit the yards and ships now ordered forth
with great delight, and so home to supper, and then to office late to
write letters, then home to bed.

20th (Lord's day). Up, and with my wife to church, where Pegg Pen very
fine in her new coloured silk suit laced with silver lace. Dined at
home, and Mr. Sheply, lately come to town, with me. A great deal of
ordinary discourse with him. Among other things praying him to speak
to Stankes to look after our business. With him and in private with Mr.
Bodham talking of our ropeyarde stores at Woolwich, which are mighty
low, even to admiration. They gone, in the evening comes Mr. Andrews and
sings with us, and he gone, I to Sir W. Batten's, where Sir J. Minnes
and he and I to talk about our letter to my Lord Treasurer, where his
folly and simple confidence so great in a report so ridiculous that he
hath drawn up to present to my Lord, nothing of it being true, that I
was ashamed, and did roundly and in many words for an houre together
talk boldly to him, which pleased Sir W. Batten and my Lady, but I was
in the right, and was the willinger to do so before them, that they
might see that I am somebody, and shall serve him so in his way another
time. So home vexed at this night's passage, for I had been very hot
with him, so to supper and to bed, out of order with this night's
vexation.

21st. Up, and with them to the Lords at White Hall, where they do single
me out to speake to and to hear, much to my content, and received their
commands, particularly in several businesses. Thence by their order to
the Attorney General's about a new warrant for Captain Taylor which I
shall carry for him to be Commissioner in spite of Sir W. Batten, and
yet indeed it is not I, but the ability of the man, that makes the Duke
and Mr. Coventry stand by their choice. I to the 'Change and there
staid long doing business, and this day for certain newes is come that
Teddiman hath brought in eighteen or twenty Dutchmen, merchants, their
Bourdeaux fleete, and two men of wary to Portsmouth.

     [Captain Sir Thomas Teddiman (or Tyddiman) had been appointed
     Rear-Admiral of Lord Sandwich's squadron of the English fleet.  In a
     letter from Sir William Coventry to Secretary Bennet, dated November
     13th, 1664, we read, "Rear Admiral Teddeman with four or five ships
     has gone to course in the Channel, and if he meet any refractory
     Dutchmen will teach them their duty" ("Calendar of State Papers,"
     Domestic, 1664.-65, p. 66).]

And I had letters this afternoon, that three are brought into the Downes
and Dover; so that the warr is begun: God give a good end to it! After
dinner at home all the afternoon busy, and at night with Sir W. Batten
and Sir J. Minnes looking over the business of stating the accounts of
the navy charge to my Lord Treasurer, where Sir J. Minnes's paper served
us in no stead almost, but was all false, and after I had done it with
great pains, he being by, I am confident he understands not one word
in it. At it till 10 at night almost. Thence by coach to Sir Philip
Warwicke's, by his desire to have conferred with him, but he being
in bed, I to White Hall to the Secretaries, and there wrote to Mr.
Coventry, and so home by coach again, a fine clear moonshine night, but
very cold. Home to my office awhile, it being past 12 at night; and so
to supper and to bed.

22nd. At the office all the morning. Sir G. Carteret, upon a motion of
Sir W. Batten's, did promise, if we would write a letter to him, to shew
it to the King on our behalf touching our desire of being Commissioners
of the Prize office. I wrote a letter to my mind and, after eating a bit
at home (Mr. Sheply dining and taking his leave of me), abroad and
to Sir G. Carteret with the letter and thence to my Lord Treasurer's;
wherewith Sir Philip Warwicke long studying all we could to make the
last year swell as high as we could. And it is much to see how he do
study for the King, to do it to get all the money from the Parliament
all he can: and I shall be serviceable to him therein, to help him to
heads upon which to enlarge the report of the expense. He did observe to
me how obedient this Parliament was for awhile, and the last sitting how
they begun to differ, and to carp at the King's officers; and what they
will do now, he says, is to make agreement for the money, for there is
no guess to be made of it. He told me he was prepared to convince the
Parliament that the Subsidys are a most ridiculous tax (the four last
not rising to L40,000), and unequall. He talks of a tax of Assessment of
L70,000 for five years; the people to be secured that it shall continue
no longer than there is really a warr; and the charges thereof to be
paid. He told me, that one year of the late Dutch warr cost L1,623,000.
Thence to my Lord Chancellor's, and there staid long with Sir W.
Batten and Sir J. Minnes, to speak with my lord about our Prize Office
business; but, being sicke and full of visitants, we could not speak
with him, and so away home. Where Sir Richard Ford did meet us with
letters from Holland this day, that it is likely the Dutch fleete will
not come out this year; they have not victuals to keep them out, and it
is likely they will be frozen before they can get back. Captain Cocke
is made Steward for sick and wounded seamen. So home to supper, where
troubled to hear my poor boy Tom has a fit of the stone, or some other
pain like it. I must consult Mr. Holliard for him. So at one in the
morning home to bed.

23rd. Up and to my office, where close all the morning about my Lord
Treasurer's accounts, and at noon home to dinner, and then to the office
all the afternoon very busy till very late at night, and then to supper
and to bed. This evening Mr. Hollyard came to me and told me that he
hath searched my boy, and he finds he hath a stone in his bladder, which
grieves me to the heart, he being a good-natured and well-disposed boy,
and more that it should be my misfortune to have him come to my house.
Sir G. Carteret was here this afternoon; and strange to see how we plot
to make the charge of this warr to appear greater than it is, because of
getting money.

24th. Up and to the office, where all the morning busy answering
of people. About noon out with Commissioner Pett, and he and I to
a Coffee-house, to drink jocolatte, very good; and so by coach to
Westminster, being the first day of the Parliament's meeting. After
the House had received the King's speech, and what more he had to say,
delivered in writing, the Chancellor being sicke, it rose, and I with
Sir Philip Warwicke home and conferred our matters about the charge
of the Navy, and have more to give him in the excessive charge of this
year's expense. I dined with him, and Mr. Povy with us and Sir Edmund
Pooly, a fine gentleman, and Mr. Chichly, and fine discourse we had
and fine talke, being proud to see myself accepted in such company and
thought better than I am. After dinner Sir Philip and I to talk again,
and then away home to the office, where sat late; beginning our sittings
now in the afternoon, because of the Parliament; and they being rose, I
to my office, where late till almost one o'clock, and then home to bed.

25th. Up and at my office all the morning, to prepare an account of the
charge we have been put to extraordinary by the Dutch already; and I
have brought it to appear L852,700; but God knows this is only a scare
to the Parliament, to make them give the more money. Thence to the
Parliament House, and there did give it to Sir Philip Warwicke; the
House being hot upon giving the King a supply of money, and I by
coach to the 'Change and took up Mr. Jenings along with me (my old
acquaintance), he telling me the mean manner that Sir Samuel Morland
lives near him, in a house he hath bought and laid out money upon, in
all to the value of L1200, but is believed to be a beggar; and so I ever
thought he would be. From the 'Change with Mr. Deering and Luellin to
the White Horse tavern in Lombard Street, and there dined with them, he
giving me a dish of meat to discourse in order to my serving Deering,
which I am already obliged to do, and shall do it, and would be glad he
were a man trusty that I might venture something along with him. Thence
home, and by and by in the evening took my wife out by coach, leaving
her at Unthanke's while I to White Hall and to Westminster Hall, where
I have not been to talk a great while, and there hear that Mrs. Lane and
her husband live a sad life together, and he is gone to be a paymaster
to a company to Portsmouth to serve at sea. She big with child. Thence
I home, calling my wife, and at Sir W. Batten's hear that the House have
given the King L2,500,000 to be paid for this warr, only for the Navy,
in three years' time; which is a joyfull thing to all the King's party
I see, but was much opposed by Mr. Vaughan and others, that it should be
so much. So home and to supper and to bed.

26th. Up and to the office, where busy all the morning. Home a while to
dinner and then to the office, where very late busy till quite weary,
but contented well with my dispatch of business, and so home to supper
and to bed.

27th (Lord's day). To church in the morning, then dined at home, and
to my office, and there all the afternoon setting right my business of
flaggs, and after all my pains find reason not to be sorry, because
I think it will bring me considerable profit. In the evening come Mr.
Andrews and Hill, and we sung, with my boy, Ravenscroft's 4-part psalms,
most admirable musique. Then (Andrews not staying) we to supper, and
after supper fell into the rarest discourse with Mr. Hill about Rome and
Italy; but most pleasant that I ever had in my life. At it very late and
then to bed.

28th. Up, and with Sir J. Minnes and W. Batten to White Hall, but no
Committee of Lords (which is like to do the King's business well). So to
Westminster, and there to Jervas's and was a little while with Jane, and
so to London by coach and to the Coffee-house, where certain news of our
peace made by Captain Allen with Argier, which is good news; and that
the Dutch have sent part of their fleete round by Scotland; and resolve
to pay off the rest half-pay, promising the rest in the Spring, hereby
keeping their men. But how true this, I know not. Home to dinner, then
come Dr. Clerke to speak with me about sick and wounded men, wherein he
is like to be concerned. After him Mr. Cutler, and much talk with him,
and with him to White Hall, to have waited on the Lords by order, but
no meeting, neither to-night, which will spoil all. I think I shall get
something by my discourse with Cutler. So home, and after being at my
office an hour with Mr. Povy talking about his business of Tangier,
getting him some money allowed him for freight of ships, wherein I hope
to get something too. He gone, home hungry and almost sick for want of
eating, and so to supper and to bed.

29th. Up, and with Sir W. Batten to the Committee of Lords at the
Council Chamber, where Sir G. Carteret told us what he had said to
the King, and how the King inclines to our request of making us
Commissioners of the Prize office, but meeting him anon in the gallery,
he tells me that my Lord Barkely is angry we should not acquaint him
with it, so I found out my Lord and pacified him, but I know not whether
he was so in earnest or no, for he looked very frowardly. Thence to the
Parliament House, and with Sir W. Batten home and dined with him, my
wife being gone to my Lady Sandwich's, and then to the office, where we
sat all the afternoon, and I at my office till past 12 at night, and so
home to bed. This day I hear that the King should say that the Dutch do
begin to comply with him. Sir John Robinson told Sir W. Batten that he
heard the King say so. I pray God it may be so.

30th. Up, and with Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes to the Committee of
the Lords, and there did our business; but, Lord! what a sorry dispatch
these great persons give to business. Thence to the 'Change, and there
hear the certainty and circumstances of the Dutch having called in their
fleete and paid their men half-pay, the other to be paid them upon their
being ready upon beat of drum to come to serve them again, and in the
meantime to have half-pay. This is said. Thence home to dinner, and so
to my office all the afternoon. In the evening my wife and Sir W. Warren
with me to White Hall, sending her with the coach to see her father and
mother. He and I up to Sir G. Carteret, and first I alone and then both
had discourse with him about things of the Navy, and so I and he calling
my wife at Unthanke's, home again, and long together talking how to
order things in a new contract for Norway goods, as well to the King's
as to his advantage. He gone, I to my monthly accounts, and, bless God!
I find I have increased my last balance, though but little; but I hope
ere long to get more. In the meantime praise God for what I have, which
is L1209. So, with my heart glad to see my accounts fall so right in
this time of mixing of monies and confusion, I home to bed.




DECEMBER 1664

December 1st. Up betimes and to White Hall to a Committee of Tangier,
and so straight home and hard to my business at my office till noon,
then to dinner, and so to my office, and by and by we sat all the
afternoon, then to my office again till past one in the morning, and so
home to supper and to bed.

2nd. Lay long in bed. Then up and to the office, where busy all the
morning. At home dined. After dinner with my wife and Mercer to the
Duke's House, and there saw "The Rivalls," which I had seen before; but
the play not good, nor anything but the good actings of Betterton and
his wife and Harris. Thence homeward, and the coach broke with us in
Lincoln's Inn Fields, and so walked to Fleete Streete, and there took
coach and home, and to my office, whither by and by comes Captain Cocke,
and then Sir W. Batten, and we all to Sir J. Minnes, and I did give
them a barrel of oysters I had given to me, and so there sat and talked,
where good discourse of the late troubles, they knowing things, all
of them, very well; and Cocke, from the King's own mouth, being then
entrusted himself much, do know particularly that the King's credulity
to Cromwell's promises, private to him, against the advice of his
friends and the certain discovery of the practices and discourses of
Cromwell in council (by Major Huntington)

     [According to Clarendon the officer here alluded to was a major in
     Cromwell's own regiment of horse, and employed by him to treat with
     Charles I. whilst at Hampton Court; but being convinced of the
     insincerity of the proceeding, communicated his suspicions to that
     monarch, and immediately gave up his commission.  We hear no more of
     Huntington till the Restoration, when his name occurs with those of
     many other officers, who tendered their services to the king.  His
     reasons for laying down his commission are printed in Thurloe's
     "State Papers" and Maseres's "Tracts."--B.]

did take away his life and nothing else. Then to some loose atheisticall
discourse of Cocke's, when he was almost drunk, and then about 11
o'clock broke up, and I to my office, to fit up an account for Povy,
wherein I hope to get something. At it till almost two o'clock, then to
supper and to bed.

3rd. Up, and at the office all the morning, and at noon to Mr. Cutler's,
and there dined with Sir W. Rider and him, and thence Sir W. Rider and I
by coach to White Hall to a Committee of the Fishery; there only to
hear Sir Edward Ford's proposal about farthings, wherein, O God! to see
almost every body interested for him; only my Lord Annesly, who is a
grave, serious man. My Lord Barkeley was there, but is the most hot,
fiery man in discourse, without any cause, that ever I saw, even to
breach of civility to my Lord Anglesey, in his discourse opposing to my
Lord's. At last, though without much satisfaction to me, it was voted
that it should be requested of the King, and that Sir Edward Ford's
proposal is the best yet made. Thence by coach home. The Duke of Yorke
being expected to-night with great joy from Portsmouth, after his having
been abroad at sea three or four days with the fleete; and the Dutch are
all drawn into their harbours. But it seems like a victory: and a matter
of some reputation to us it is, and blemish to them; but in no degree
like what it is esteemed at, the weather requiring them to do so. Home
and at my office late, and then to supper and to bed.

4th (Lord's day). Lay long in bed, and then up and to my office, there
to dispatch a business in order to the getting something out of the
Tangier business, wherein I have an opportunity to get myself paid upon
the score of freight. I hope a good sum. At noon home to dinner, and
then in the afternoon to church. So home, and by and by comes Mr. Hill
and Andrews, and sung together long and with great content. Then to
supper and broke up. Pretty discourse, very pleasant and ingenious, and
so to my office a little, and then home (after prayers) to bed. This day
I hear the Duke of Yorke is come to towne, though expected last night,
as I observed, but by what hindrance stopped I can't tell.

5th. Up, and to White Hall with Sir J. Minnes; and there, among an
infinite crowd of great persons, did kiss the Duke's hand; but had no
time to discourse. Thence up and down the gallery, and got my Lord of
Albemarle's hand to my bill for Povy, but afterwards was asked some
scurvy questions by Povy about my demands, which troubled [me], but will
do no great hurt I think. Thence vexed home, and there by appointment
comes my cozen Roger Pepys and Mrs. Turner, and dined with me, and very
merry we were. They staid all the afternoon till night, and then after
I had discoursed an hour with Sir W. Warren plainly declaring my
resolution to desert him if he goes on to join with Castle, who and
his family I, for great provocation, love not, which he takes with some
trouble, but will concur in everything with me, he says. Now I am loth,
I confess, to lose him, he having been the best friend I have had ever
in this office. So he being gone, we all, it being night, in Madam
Turner's coach to her house, there to see, as she tells us, how fat Mrs.
The. is grown, and so I find her, but not as I expected, but mightily
pleased I am to hear the mother commend her daughter Betty that she is
like to be a great beauty, and she sets much by her. Thence I to White
Hall, and there saw Mr. Coventry come to towne, and, with all my heart,
am glad to see him, but could have no talke with him, he being but just
come. Thence back and took up my wife, and home, where a while, and then
home to supper and to bed.

5th. Up, and in Sir W. Batten's coach to White Hall, but the Duke
being gone forth, I to Westminster Hall, and there spent much time till
towards noon to and fro with people. So by and by Mrs. Lane comes and
plucks me by the cloak to speak to me, and I was fain to go to her
shop, and pretending to buy some bands made her go home, and by and by
followed her, and there did what I would with her, and so after many
discourses and her intreating me to do something for her husband, which
I promised to do, and buying a little band of her, which I intend to
keep to, I took leave, there coming a couple of footboys to her with a
coach to fetch her abroad I know not to whom. She is great with child,
and she says I must be godfather, but I do not intend it. Thence by
coach to the Old Exchange, and there hear that the Dutch are fitting
their ships out again, which puts us to new discourse, and to alter our
thoughts of the Dutch, as to their want of courage or force. Thence by
appointment to the White Horse Taverne in Lumbard Streete, and there
dined with my Lord Rutherford, Povy, Mr. Gauden, Creed, and others, and
very merry, and after dinner among other things Povy and I withdrew, and
I plainly told him that I was concerned in profit, but very justly,
in this business of the Bill that I have been these two or three days
about, and he consents to it, and it shall be paid. He tells me how he
believes, and in part knows, Creed to be worth L10,000; nay, that now
and then he [Povy] hath three or L4,000 in his hands, for which he gives
the interest that the King gives, which is ten per cent., and that Creed
do come and demand it every three months the interest to be paid him,
which Povy looks upon as a cunning and mean tricke of him; but for all
that, he will do and is very rich. Thence to the office, where we sat
and where Mr. Coventry came the first time after his return from sea,
which I was glad of. So after office to my office, and then home to
supper, and to my office again, and then late home to bed.

7th. Lay long, then up, and among others Bagwell's wife coming to speak
with me put new thoughts of folly into me which I am troubled at. Thence
after doing business at my office, I by coach to my Lady Sandwich's,
and there dined with her, and found all well and merry. Thence to White
Hall, and we waited on the Duke, who looks better than he did, methinks,
before his voyage; and, I think, a little more stern than he used to do.
Thence to the Temple to my cozen Roger Pepys, thinking to have met the
Doctor to have discoursed our business, but he came not, so I home,
and there by agreement came my Lord Rutherford, Povy, Gauden, Creed,
Alderman Backewell, about Tangier business of accounts between
Rutherford and Gauden. Here they were with me an hour or more, then
after drinking away, and Povy and Creed staid and eat with me; but I was
sorry I had no better cheer for Povy; for the foole may be useful, and
is a cunning fellow in his way, which is a strange one, and that, that
I meet not in any other man, nor can describe in him. They late with me,
and when gone my boy and I to musique, and then to bed.

8th. Up, and to my office, where all the morning busy. At noon dined
at home, and then to the office, where we sat all the afternoon. In the
evening comes my aunt and uncle Wight, Mrs. Norbury, and her daughter,
and after them Mr. Norbury, where no great pleasure, my aunt being out
of humour in her fine clothes, and it raining hard. Besides, I was a
little too bold with her about her doating on Dr. Venner. Anon they went
away, and I till past 12 at night at my office, and then home to bed.

9th. Up betimes and walked to Mr. Povy's, and there, not without some
few troublesome questions of his, I got a note, and went and received
L117 5s. of Alderman Viner upon my pretended freight of the "William"
for Tangier, which overbears me on one side with joy and on the other
to think of my condition if I shall be called into examination about it,
and (though in strictness it is due) not be able to give a good account
of it. Home with it, and there comes Captain Taylor to me, and he and
I did set even the business of the ship Union lately gone for Tangier,
wherein I hope to get L50 more, for all which the Lord be praised. At
noon home to dinner, Mr. Hunt and his wife with us, and very pleasant.
Then in the afternoon I carried them home by coach, and I to Westminster
Hall, and thence to Gervas's, and there find I cannot prevail with Jane
to go forth with me, but though I took a good occasion of going to the
Trumpet she declined coming, which vexed me. 'Je avait grande envie
envers elle, avec vrai amour et passion'. Thence home and to my office
till one in the morning, setting to rights in writing this day's two
accounts of Povy and Taylor, and then quietly to bed. This day I had
several letters from several places, of our bringing in great numbers of
Dutch ships.

10th. Lay long, at which I am ashamed, because of so many people
observing it that know not how late I sit up, and for fear of Sir W.
Batten's speaking of it to others, he having staid for me a good while.
At the office all the morning, where comes my Lord Brunkard with his
patent in his hand, and delivered it to Sir J. Minnes and myself, we
alone being there all the day, and at noon I in his coach with him to
the 'Change, where he set me down; a modest civil person he seems to be,
but wholly ignorant in the business of the Navy as possible, but I hope
to make a friend of him, being a worthy man. Thence after hearing the
great newes of so many Dutchmen being brought in to Portsmouth and
elsewhere, which it is expected will either put them upon present
revenge or despair, I with Sir W. Rider and Cutler to dinner all alone
to the Great James, where good discourse, and, I hope, occasion of
getting something hereafter. After dinner to White Hall to the Fishery,
where the Duke was with us. So home, and late at my office, writing many
letters, then home to supper and to bed. Yesterday come home, and this
night I visited Sir W. Pen, who dissembles great respect and love to me,
but I understand him very well. Major Holmes is come from Guinny, and is
now at Plymouth with great wealth, they say.

11th (Lord's day). Up and to church alone in the morning. Dined at home,
mighty pleasantly. In the afternoon I to the French church, where much
pleased with the three sisters of the parson, very handsome, especially
in their noses, and sing prettily. I heard a good sermon of the old man,
touching duty to parents. Here was Sir Samuel Morland and his lady very
fine, with two footmen in new liverys (the church taking much notice of
them), and going into their coach after sermon with great gazeing. So
I home, and my cozen, Mary Pepys's husband, comes after me, and told me
that out of the money he received some months since he did receive 18d.
too much, and did now come and give it me, which was very pretty.
So home, and there found Mr. Andrews and his lady, a well-bred and a
tolerable pretty woman, and by and by Mr. Hill and to singing, and then
to supper, then to sing again, and so good night. To prayers and tonight
[bed]. It is a little strange how these Psalms of Ravenscroft after 2
or 3 times singing prove but the same again, though good. No diversity
appearing at all almost.

12th. Up, and with Sir W. Batten by coach to White Hall, where all of
us with the Duke; Mr. Coventry privately did tell me the reason of his
advice against our pretences to the Prize Office (in his letter from
Portsmouth), because he knew that the King and the Duke had resolved to
put in some Parliament men that have deserved well, and that would
needs be obliged, by putting them in. Thence homeward, called at my
bookseller's and bespoke some books against the year's out, and then
to the 'Change, and so home to dinner, and then to the office, where
my Lord Brunkard comes and reads over part of our Instructions in the
Navy--and I expounded it to him, so he is become my disciple. He gone,
comes Cutler to tell us that the King of France hath forbid any canvass
to be carried out of his kingdom, and I to examine went with him to the
East India house to see a letter, but came too late. So home again, and
there late till 12 at night at my office, and then home to supper and
to bed. This day (to see how things are ordered in the world), I had
a command from the Earle of Sandwich, at Portsmouth, not to be forward
with Mr. Cholmly and Sir J. Lawson about the Mole at Tangier, because
that what I do therein will (because of his friendship to me known)
redound against him, as if I had done it upon his score. So I wrote to
my Lord my mistake, and am contented to promise never to pursue it more,
which goes against my mind with all my heart.

13th. Lay long in bed, then up, and many people to speak with me. Then
to my office, and dined at noon at home, then to the office again, where
we sat all the afternoon, and then home at night to a little supper, and
so after my office again at 12 at night home to bed.

14th. Up, and after a while at the office, I abroad in several places,
among others to my bookseller's, and there spoke for several books
against New Year's day, I resolving to lay out about L7 or L8, God
having given me some profit extraordinary of late; and bespoke also some
plate, spoons, and forks. I pray God keep me from too great expenses,
though these will still be pretty good money. Then to the 'Change, and
I home to dinner, where Creed and Mr. Caesar, my boy's lute master,
who plays indeed mighty finely, and after dinner I abroad, parting from
Creed, and away to and fro, laying out or preparing for laying out more
money, but I hope and resolve not to exceed therein, and to-night spoke
for some fruit for the country for my father against Christmas, and
where should I do it, but at the pretty woman's, that used to stand at
the doore in Fanchurch Streete, I having a mind to know her. So home,
and late at my office, evening reckonings with Shergoll, hoping to get
money by the business, and so away home to supper and to bed, not being
very well through my taking cold of late, and so troubled with some
wind.

15th. Called up very betimes by Mr. Cholmly, and with him a good while
about some of his Tangier accounts; and, discoursing of the condition
of Tangier, he did give me the whole account of the differences between
Fitzgerald and Norwood, which were very high on both sides, but
most imperious and base on Fitzgerald's, and yet through my Lord
FitzHarding's means, the Duke of York is led rather to blame Norwood and
to speake that he should be called home, than be sensible of the other.
He is a creature of FitzHarding's, as a fellow that may be done with
what he will, and, himself certainly pretending to be Generall of the
King's armies, when Monk dyeth, desires to have as few great or wise men
in employment as he can now, but such as he can put in and keep under,
which he do this coxcomb Fitzgerald. It seems, of all mankind there
is no man so led by another as the Duke is by Lord Muskerry and
this FitzHarding, insomuch, as when the King would have him to be
Privy-Purse, the Duke wept, and said, "But, Sir, I must have your
promise, if you will have my dear Charles from me, that if ever you have
occasion for an army again, I may have him with me; believing him to be
the best commander of an army in the world." But Mr. Cholmly thinks, as
all other men I meet with do, that he is a very ordinary fellow. It is
strange how the Duke also do love naturally, and affect the Irish above
the English. He, of the company he carried with him to sea, took above
two-thirds Irish and French. He tells me the King do hate my Lord
Chancellor; and that they, that is the King and my Lord FitzHarding, do
laugh at him for a dull fellow; and in all this business of the Dutch
war do nothing by his advice, hardly consulting him. Only he is a good
minister in other respects, and the King cannot be without him; but,
above all, being the Duke's father-in-law, he is kept in; otherwise
FitzHarding were able to fling down two of him. This, all the wise and
grave lords see, and cannot help it; but yield to it. But he bemoans
what the end of it may be, the King being ruled by these men, as he hath
been all along since his coming; to the razing all the strong-holds in
Scotland, and giving liberty to the Irish in Ireland, whom Cromwell had
settled all in one corner; who are now able, and it is feared everyday
a massacre again among them. He being gone I abroad to the carrier's, to
see some things sent away to my father against Christmas, and thence to
Moorfields, and there up and down to several houses to drink to look for
a place 'pour rencontrer la femme de je sais quoi' against next Monday,
but could meet none. So to the Coffeehouse, where great talke of the
Comet seen in several places; and among our men at sea, and by my Lord
Sandwich, to whom I intend to write about it to-night. Thence home to
dinner, and then to the office, where all the afternoon, and in the
evening home to supper, and then to the office late, and so to bed. This
night I begun to burn wax candles in my closett at the office, to try
the charge, and to see whether the smoke offends like that of tallow
candles.

16th. Up, and by water to Deptford, thinking to have met 'la femme de'
Bagwell, but failed, and having done some business at the yard, I back
again, it being a fine fresh morning to walk. Back again, Mr. Wayth
walking with me to Half-Way House talking about Mr. Castle's fine knees
lately delivered in. In which I am well informed that they are not as
they should be to make them knees, and I hope shall make good use of it
to the King's service. Thence home, and having dressed myself, to the
'Change, and thence home to dinner, and so abroad by coach with my wife,
and bought a looking glasse by the Old Exchange, which costs me L5 5s.
and 6s. for the hooks. A very fair glasse. So toward my cozen Scott's,
but meeting my Lady Sandwich's coach, my wife turned back to follow
them, thinking they might, as they did, go to visit her, and I 'light
and to Mrs. Harman, and there staid and talked in her shop with her, and
much pleased I am with her. We talked about Anthony Joyce's giving over
trade and that he intends to live in lodgings, which is a very mad,
foolish thing. She tells me she hears and believes it is because he,
being now begun to be called on offices, resolves not to take the new
oathe, he having formerly taken the Covenant or Engagement, but I think
he do very simply and will endeavour for his wife's sake to advise him
therein. Thence to my cozen Scott's, and there met my cozen Roger Pepys,
and Mrs. Turner, and The. and Joyce, and prated all the while, and so
with the "corps" to church and heard a very fine sermon of the Parson of
the parish, and so homeward with them in their coach, but finding it too
late to go home with me, I took another coach and so home, and after a
while at my office, home to supper and to bed.

17th. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning. At noon I
to the 'Change, and there, among others, had my first meeting with Mr.
L'Estrange, who hath endeavoured several times to speak with me. It is
to get, now and then, some newes of me, which I shall, as I see cause,
give him. He is a man of fine conversation, I think, but I am sure most
courtly and full of compliments. Thence home to dinner, and then come
the looking-glass man to set up the looking-glass I bought yesterday,
in my dining-room, and very handsome it is. So abroad by coach to White
Hall, and there to the Committee of Tangier, and then the Fishing. Mr.
Povy did in discourse give me a rub about my late bill for money that
I did get of him, which vexed me and stuck in my mind all this evening,
though I know very well how to cleare myself at the worst. So home and
to my office, where late, and then home to bed. Mighty talke there is
of this Comet that is seen a'nights; and the King and Queene did sit up
last night to see it, and did, it seems. And to-night I thought to
have done so too; but it is cloudy, and so no stars appear. But I will
endeavour it. Mr. Gray did tell me to-night, for certain, that the
Dutch, as high as they seem, do begin to buckle; and that one man in
this Kingdom did tell the King that he is offered L40,000 to make a
peace, and others have been offered money also. It seems the taking of
their Bourdeaux fleete thus, arose from a printed Gazette of the Dutch's
boasting of fighting, and having beaten the English: in confidence
whereof (it coming to Bourdeaux), all the fleete comes out, and so falls
into our hands.

18th (Lord's day). To church, where, God forgive me! I spent most of my
time in looking [on] my new Morena--[a brunette]--at the other side of
the church, an acquaintance of Pegg Pen's. So home to dinner, and then
to my chamber to read Ben Johnson's Cataline, a very excellent piece,
and so to church again, and thence we met at the office to hire ships,
being in great haste and having sent for several masters of ships to
come to us. Then home, and there Mr. Andrews and Hill come and we sung
finely, and by and by Mr. Fuller, the Parson, and supped with me, he and
a friend of his, but my musique friends would not stay supper. At
and after supper Mr. Fuller and I told many storys of apparitions and
delusions thereby, and I out with my storys of Tom Mallard. He gone, I a
little to my office, and then to prayers and to bed.

19th. Going to bed betimes last night we waked betimes, and from our
people's being forced to take the key to go out to light a candle, I was
very angry and begun to find fault with my wife for not commanding her
servants as she ought. Thereupon she giving me some cross answer I did
strike her over her left eye such a blow as the poor wretch did cry out
and was in great pain, but yet her spirit was such as to endeavour to
bite and scratch me. But I coying--[stroking or caressing]--with her
made her leave crying, and sent for butter and parsley, and friends
presently one with another, and I up, vexed at my heart to think what I
had done, for she was forced to lay a poultice or something to her eye
all day, and is black, and the people of the house observed it. But I
was forced to rise, and up and with Sir J. Minnes to White Hall, and
there we waited on the Duke. And among other things Mr. Coventry took
occasion to vindicate himself before the Duke and us, being all there,
about the choosing of Taylor for Harwich. Upon which the Duke did clear
him, and did tell us that he did expect, that, after he had named a man,
none of us shall then oppose or find fault with the man; but if we had
anything to say, we ought to say it before he had chose him. Sir G.
Carteret thought himself concerned, and endeavoured to clear himself:
and by and by Sir W. Batten did speak, knowing himself guilty, and did
confess, that being pressed by the Council he did say what he did, that
he was accounted a fanatique; but did not know that at that time he had
been appointed by his Royal Highness. To which the Duke [replied] that
it was impossible but he must know that he had appointed him; and so it
did appear that the Duke did mean all this while Sir W. Batten. So by
and by we parted, and Mr. Coventry did privately tell me that he did
this day take this occasion to mention the business to give the Duke an
opportunity of speaking his mind to Sir W. Batten in this business, of
which I was heartily glad. Thence home, and not finding Bagwell's wife
as I expected, I to the 'Change and there walked up and down, and then
home, and she being come I bid her go and stay at Mooregate for me, and
after going up to my wife (whose eye is very bad, but she is in very
good temper to me), and after dinner I to the place and walked round the
fields again and again, but not finding her I to the 'Change, and there
found her waiting for me and took her away, and to an alehouse, and
there I made much of her, and then away thence and to another and
endeavoured to caress her, but 'elle ne voulait pas', which did vex me,
but I think it was chiefly not having a good easy place to do it upon.
So we broke up and parted and I to the office, where we sat hiring of
ships an hour or two, and then to my office, and thence (with Captain
Taylor home to my house) to give him instructions and some notice of
what to his great satisfaction had happened to-day. Which I do because
I hope his coming into this office will a little cross Sir W. Batten and
may do me good. He gone, I to supper with my wife, very pleasant, and
then a little to my office and to bed. My mind, God forgive me, too much
running upon what I can 'ferais avec la femme de Bagwell demain', having
promised to go to Deptford and 'a aller a sa maison avec son mari' when
I come thither.

20th. Up and walked to Deptford, where after doing something at the yard
I walked, without being observed, with Bagwell home to his house, and
there was very kindly used, and the poor people did get a dinner for me
in their fashion, of which I also eat very well. After dinner I found
occasion of sending him abroad, and then alone 'avec elle je tentais
a faire ce que je voudrais et contre sa force je le faisais biens que
passe a mon contentment'. By and by he coming back again I took leave
and walked home, and then there to dinner, where Dr. Fayrebrother come
to see me and Luellin. We dined, and I to the office, leaving them,
where we sat all the afternoon, and I late at the office. To supper and
to the office again very late, then home to bed.

21st. Up, and after evening reckonings to this day with Mr. Bridges,
the linnen draper, for callicos, I out to Doctors' Commons, where by
agreement my cozen Roger and I did meet my cozen Dr. Tom Pepys, and
there a great many and some high words on both sides, but I must
confess I was troubled; first, to find my cozen Roger such a simple but
well-meaning man as he is; next to think that my father, out of folly
and vain glory, should now and then (as by their words I gather) be
speaking how he had set up his son Tom with his goods and house, and now
these words are brought against him--I fear to the depriving him of all
the profit the poor man intended to make of the lease of his house and
sale of his owne goods. I intend to make a quiet end if I can with the
Doctor, being a very foul-tounged fool and of great inconvenience to
be at difference with such a one that will make the base noise about it
that he will. Thence, very much vexed to find myself so much troubled
about other men's matters, I to Mrs. Turner's, in Salsbury Court, and
with her a little, and carried her, the porter staying for me, our
eagle, which she desired the other day, and we were glad to be rid of
her, she fouling our house of office mightily. They are much pleased
with her. And thence I home and after dinner to the office, where Sir
W. Rider and Cutler come, and in dispute I very high with them against
their demands, I hope to no hurt to myself, for I was very plain with
them to the best of my reason. So they gone I home to supper, then to
the office again and so home to bed. My Lord Sandwich this day writes
me word that he hath seen (at Portsmouth) the Comet, and says it is the
most extraordinary thing that ever he saw.

22nd. Up and betimes to my office, and then out to several places,
among others to Holborne to have spoke with one Mr. Underwood about some
English hemp, he lies against Gray's Inn. Thereabouts I to a barber's
shop to have my hair cut, and there met with a copy of verses, mightily
commended by some gentlemen there, of my Lord Mordaunt's, in excuse
of his going to sea this late expedition, with the Duke of Yorke. But,
Lord! they are but sorry things; only a Lord made them. Thence to the
'Change; and there, among the merchants, I hear fully the news of
our being beaten to dirt at Guinny, by De Ruyter with his fleete. The
particulars, as much as by Sir G. Carteret afterwards I heard, I have
said in a letter to my Lord Sandwich this day at Portsmouth; it being
most wholly to the utter ruine of our Royall Company, and reproach and
shame to the whole nation, as well as justification to them in their
doing wrong to no man as to his private [property], only takeing
whatever is found to belong to the Company, and nothing else. Dined at
the Dolphin, Sir G. Carteret, Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, and I, with
Sir W. Boreman and Sir Theophilus Biddulph and others, Commissioners of
the Sewers, about our place below to lay masts in. But coming a little
too soon, I out again, and tooke boat down to Redriffe; and just in
time within two minutes, and saw the new vessel of Sir William Petty's
launched, the King and Duke being there.

     [Pepys was wrong as to the name of Sir William Petty's new
     doublekeeled boat.  On February 13th, 1664-65, he gives the correct
     title, which was "The Experiment."]

It swims and looks finely, and I believe will do well. The name I think
is Twilight, but I do not know certainly. Coming away back immediately
to dinner, where a great deal of good discourse, and Sir G. Carteret's
discourse of this Guinny business, with great displeasure at the losse
of our honour there, and do now confess that the trade brought all these
troubles upon us between the Dutch and us. Thence to the office and
there sat late, then I to my office and there till 12 at night, and so
home to bed weary.

23rd. Up and to my office, then come by appointment cozen Tom Trice to
me, and I paid him the L20 remaining due to him upon the bond of L100
given him by agreement November, 1663, to end the difference between us
about my aunt's, his mother's, money. And here, being willing to know
the worst, I told him, "I hope now there is nothing remaining between
you and I of future dispute." "No," says he, "nothing at all that I know
of, but only a small matter of about 20 or 30s. that my father Pepys
received for me of rent due to me in the country, which I will in a day
or two bring you an account of," and so we parted. Dined at home upon
a good turkey which Mr. Sheply sent us, then to the office all the
afternoon, Mr. Cutler and others coming to me about business. I
hear that the Dutch have prepared a fleete to go the backway to the
Streights, where without doubt they will master our fleete. This put
to that of Guinny makes me fear them mightily, and certainly they are
a most wise people, and careful of their business. The King of France,
they say, do declare himself obliged to defend them, and lays claim by
his Embassador to the wines we have taken from the Dutch Bourdeaux men,
and more, it is doubted whether the Swede will be our friend or no. Pray
God deliver us out of these troubles! This day Sir W. Batten sent and
afterwards spoke to me, to have me and my wife come and dine with them
on Monday next: which is a mighty condescension in them, and for some
great reason I am sure, or else it pleases God by my late care of
business to make me more considerable even with them than I am sure they
would willingly owne me to be. God make me thankfull and carefull to
preserve myself so, for I am sure they hate me and it is hope or fear
that makes them flatter me. It being a bright night, which it has not
been a great while, I purpose to endeavour to be called in the morning
to see the Comet, though I fear we shall not see it, because it rises in
the east but 16 degrees, and then the houses will hinder us.

24th. Having sat up all night to past two o'clock this morning, our
porter, being appointed, comes and tells us that the bellman tells him
that the star is seen upon Tower Hill; so I, that had been all night
setting in order all my old papers in my chamber, did leave off all,
and my boy and I to Tower Hill, it being a most fine, bright moonshine
night, and a great frost; but no Comet to be seen. So after running once
round the Hill, I and Tom, we home and then to bed. Rose about 9 o'clock
and then to the office, where sitting all the morning. At noon to the
'Change, to the Coffee-house; and there heard Sir Richard Ford tell the
whole story of our defeat at Guinny. Wherein our men are guilty of the
most horrid cowardice and perfidiousness, as he says and tells it, that
ever Englishmen were. Captain Raynolds, that was the only commander of
any of the King's ships there, was shot at by De Ruyter, with a bloody
flag flying. He, instead of opposing (which, indeed, had been to no
purpose, but only to maintain honour), did poorly go on board himself,
to ask what De Ruyter would have; and so yielded to whatever Ruyter
would desire. The King and Duke are highly vexed at it, it seems, and
the business deserves it. Thence home to dinner, and then abroad to buy
some things, and among others to my bookseller's, and there saw several
books I spoke for, which are finely bound and good books to my great
content. So home and to my office, where late. This evening I being
informed did look and saw the Comet, which is now, whether worn away
or no I know not, but appears not with a tail, but only is larger and
duller than any other star, and is come to rise betimes, and to make a
great arch, and is gone quite to a new place in the heavens than it was
before: but I hope in a clearer night something more will be seen. So
home to bed.

25th (Lord's day and Christmas day). Up (my wife's eye being ill still
of the blow I did in a passion give her on Monday last) to church alone,
where Mr. Mills, a good sermon. To dinner at home, where very pleasant
with my wife and family. After dinner I to Sir W. Batten's, and there
received so much good usage (as I have of late done) from him and my
Lady, obliging me and my wife, according to promise, to come and dine
with them to-morrow with our neighbours, that I was in pain all the day,
and night too after, to know how to order the business of my wife's not
going, and by discourse receive fresh instances of Sir J. Minnes's
folly in complaining to Sir G. Carteret of Sir W. Batten and me for some
family offences, such as my having of a stopcock to keepe the water from
them, which vexes me, but it would more but that Sir G. Carteret knows
him very well. Thence to the French church, but coming too late I
returned and to Mr. Rawlinson's church, where I heard a good sermon of
one that I remember was at Paul's with me, his name Maggett; and very
great store of fine women there is in this church, more than I know
anywhere else about us. So home and to my chamber, looking over and
setting in order my papers and books, and so to supper, and then to
prayers and to bed.

26th. Up, and with Sir W. Pen to White Hall, and there with the rest did
our usual business before the Duke, and then with Sir W. Batten back
and to his house, where I by sicknesse excused my wife's coming to them
to-day. Thence I to the Coffeehouse, where much good discourse, and all
the opinion now is that the Dutch will avoid fighting with us at home,
but do all the hurte they can to us abroad; which it may be they may for
a while, but that, I think, cannot support them long. Thence to Sir W.
Batten's, where Mr. Coventry and all our families here, women and all,
and Sir R. Ford and his, and a great feast and good discourse and merry,
there all the afternoon and evening till late, only stepped in to see
my wife, then to my office to enter my day's work, and so home to bed,
where my people and wife innocently at cards very merry, and I to bed,
leaving them to their sport and blindman's buff.

27th. My people came to bed, after their sporting, at four o'clock in
the morning; I up at seven, and to Deptford and Woolwich in a gally; the
Duke calling to me out of the barge in which the King was with him going
down the river, to know whither I was going. I told him to Woolwich, but
was troubled afterward I should say no farther, being in a gally, lest
he think me too profuse in my journeys. Did several businesses, and then
back again by two o'clock to Sir J. Minnes's to dinner by appointment,
where all yesterday's company but Mr. Coventry, who could not come. Here
merry, and after an hour's chat I down to the office, where busy late,
and then home to supper and to bed. The Comet appeared again to-night,
but duskishly. I went to bed, leaving my wife and all her folks, and
Will also, too, come to make Christmas gambolls to-night.

28th. I waked in the morning about 6 o'clock and my wife not come to
bed; I lacked a pot, but there was none, and bitter cold, so was forced
to rise and piss in the chimney, and to bed again. Slept a little
longer, and then hear my people coming up, and so I rose, and my wife
to bed at eight o'clock in the morning, which vexed me a little, but I
believe there was no hurt in it all, but only mirthe, therefore took no
notice. I abroad with Sir W. Batten to the Council Chamber, where all of
us to discourse about the way of measuring ships and the freight fit to
give for them by the tun, where it was strange methought to hear so
poor discourses among the Lords themselves, and most of all to see how
a little empty matter delivered gravely by Sir W. Pen was taken mighty
well, though nothing in the earth to the purpose. But clothes, I
perceive more and more every day, is a great matter. Thence home with
Sir W. Batten by coach, and I home to dinner, finding my wife still
in bed. After dinner abroad, and among other things visited my Lady
Sandwich, and was there, with her and the young ladies, playing at cards
till night. Then home and to my office late, then home to bed, leaving
my wife and people up to more sports, but without any great satisfaction
to myself therein.

29th. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning. Then whereas I
should have gone and dined with Sir W. Pen (and the rest of the officers
at his house), I pretended to dine with my Lady Sandwich and so home,
where I dined well, and began to wipe and clean my books in my chamber
in order to the settling of my papers and things there thoroughly, and
then to the office, where all the afternoon sitting, and in the evening
home to supper, and then to my work again.

30th. Lay very long in bed with my wife, it being very cold, and my wife
very full of a resolution to keepe within doors, not so much as to go
to church or see my Lady Sandwich before Easter next, which I am willing
enough to, though I seem the contrary. This and other talke kept me
a-bed till almost 10 a'clock. Then up and made an end of looking over
all my papers and books and taking everything out of my chamber to have
all made clean. At noon dined, and after dinner forth to several places
to pay away money, to clear myself in all the world, and, among others,
paid my bookseller L6 for books I had from him this day, and the
silversmith L22 18s. for spoons, forks, and sugar box, and being well
pleased with seeing my business done to my mind as to my meeting with
people and having my books ready for me, I home and to my office, and
there did business late, and then home to supper, prayers, and to bed.

31st. At the office all the morning, and after dinner there again,
dispatched first my letters, and then to my accounts, not of the month
but of the whole yeare also, and was at it till past twelve at night,
it being bitter cold; but yet I was well satisfied with my worke, and,
above all, to find myself, by the great blessing of God, worth L1349, by
which, as I have spent very largely, so I have laid up above L500 this
yeare above what I was worth this day twelvemonth. The Lord make me for
ever thankful to his holy name for it! Thence home to eat a little and
so to bed. Soon as ever the clock struck one, I kissed my wife in the
kitchen by the fireside, wishing her a merry new yeare, observing that
I believe I was the first proper wisher of it this year, for I did it as
soon as ever the clock struck one.

So ends the old yeare, I bless God, with great joy to me, not only from
my having made so good a yeare of profit, as having spent L420 and laid
up L540 and upwards; but I bless God I never have been in so good plight
as to my health in so very cold weather as this is, nor indeed in any
hot weather, these ten years, as I am at this day, and have been these
four or five months. But I am at a great losse to know whether it be
my hare's foote, or taking every morning of a pill of turpentine, or my
having left off the wearing of a gowne. My family is, my wife, in good
health, and happy with her; her woman Mercer, a pretty, modest, quiett
mayde; her chambermayde Besse, her cook mayde Jane, the little girl
Susan, and my boy, which I have had about half a yeare, Tom Edwards,
which I took from the King's chappell, and a pretty and loving quiett
family I have as any man in England. My credit in the world and my
office grows daily, and I am in good esteeme with everybody, I think. My
troubles of my uncle's estate pretty well over; but it comes to be but
of little profit to us, my father being much supported by my purse. But
great vexations remain upon my father and me from my brother Tom's death
and ill condition, both to our disgrace and discontent, though no great
reason for either. Publique matters are all in a hurry about a Dutch
warr. Our preparations great; our provocations against them great; and,
after all our presumption, we are now afeard as much of them, as we
lately contemned them. Every thing else in the State quiett, blessed be
God! My Lord Sandwich at sea with the fleete at Portsmouth; sending
some about to cruise for taking of ships, which we have done to a great
number. This Christmas I judged it fit to look over all my papers and
books; and to tear all that I found either boyish or not to be worth
keeping, or fit to be seen, if it should please God to take me away
suddenly. Among others, I found these two or three notes, which I
thought fit to keep.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS, PEPY'S DIARY 1664, COMPLETE:

     A real and not a complimentary acknowledgment
     A mad merry slut she is
     About several businesses, hoping to get money by them
     After many protestings by degrees I did arrive at what I would
     All divided that were bred so long at school together
     All ended in love
     All the men were dead of the plague, and the ship cast ashore
     And with the great men in curing of their claps
     At least 12 or 14,000 people in the street (to see the hanging)
     Bath at the top of his house
     Bearing more sayle will go faster than any other ships (multihull)
     Began discourse of my not getting of children
     Below what people think these great people say and do
     But the wench went, and I believe had her turn served
     Came to bed to me, but all would not make me friends
     Chatted with her, her husband out of the way
     Could not saw above 4 inches of the stone in a day
     Do look upon me as a remembrancer of his former vanity
     Doubtfull of himself, and easily be removed from his own opinion
     Drink a dish of coffee
     Even to the having bad words with my wife, and blows too
     Expected musique, the missing of which spoiled my dinner
     Expressly taking care that nobody might see this business done
     Fear of making her think me to be in a better condition
     Fear all his kindness is but only his lust to her
     Feared I might meet with some people that might know me
     Fetch masts from New England
     Few in any age that do mind anything that is abstruse
     Find myself to over-value things when a child
     Gadding abroad to look after beauties
     Generally with corruption, but most indeed with neglect
     God forgive me! what thoughts and wishes I had
     Good writers are not admired by the present
     Greatest businesses are done so superficially
     Had no mind to meddle with her
     Having some experience, but greater conceit of it than is fit
     Hear something of the effects of our last meeting (pregnancy?)
     Helping to slip their calfes when there is occasion
     Her months upon her is gone to bed
     Her impudent tricks and ways of getting money
     How little to be presumed of in our greatest undertakings
     I had agreed with Jane Welsh, but she came not, which vexed me
     I do not like his being angry and in debt both together to me
     I will not by any over submission make myself cheap
     I slept soundly all the sermon
     Ill from my late cutting my hair so close to my head
     In my dining-room she was doing something upon the pott
     In a hackney and full of people, was ashamed to be seen
     Ireland in a very distracted condition
     Irish in Ireland, whom Cromwell had settled all in one corner
     Jane going into the boat did fall down and show her arse
     King is mighty kind to these his bastard children
     King still do doat upon his women, even beyond all shame
     Lay long caressing my wife and talking
     Let her brew as she has baked
     Little children employed, every one to do something
     Mankind pleasing themselves in the easy delights of the world
     Meazles, we fear, or, at least, of a scarlett feavour
     Methought very ill, or else I am grown worse to please
     Mind to have her bring it home
     Mrs. Lane was gone forth, and so I missed of my intent
     My wife was angry with me for not coming home, and for gadding
     My leg fell in a hole broke on the bridge
     My wife made great means to be friends, coming to my bedside
     Never to trust too much to any man in the world
     New Netherlands to English rule, under the title of New York
     Not well, and so had no pleasure at all with my poor wife
     Not when we can, but when we list
     Not the greatest wits, but the steady man
     Nothing of the memory of a man, an houre after he is dead!
     Now against her going into the country (lay together)
     Periwigg he lately made me cleansed of its nits
     Play good, but spoiled with the ryme, which breaks the sense
     Pleased to look upon their pretty daughter
     Pray God give me a heart to fear a fall, and to prepare for it!
     Presse seamen, without which we cannot really raise men
     Pretty sayings, which are generally like paradoxes
     Reduced the Dutch settlement of New Netherlands to English rule
     Rotten teeth and false, set in with wire
     Ryme, which breaks the sense
     Saw "The German Princess" acted, by the woman herself
     Sent my wife to get a place to see Turner hanged
     Shakespeare's plays
     She had the cunning to cry a great while, and talk and blubber
     She had got and used some puppy-dog water
     Sheriffs did endeavour to get one jewell
     Slabbering my band sent home for another
     So home to prayers and to bed
     Staid two hours with her kissing her, but nothing more
     Strange slavery that I stand in to beauty
     Subject to be put into a disarray upon very small occasions
     Such open flattery is beastly
     Talked with Mrs. Lane about persuading her to Hawly
     Tear all that I found either boyish or not to be worth keeping
     That hair by hair had his horse's tail pulled off indeed
     Their saws have no teeth, but it is the sand only
     There eat and drank, and had my pleasure of her twice
     There did see Mrs. Lane.....
     These Lords are hard to be trusted
     Things wear out of themselves and come fair again
     Thinks she is with child, but I neither believe nor desire it
     Till 12 at night, and then home to supper and to bed
     To my Lord Sandwich, thinking to have dined there
     Travels over the high hills in Asia above the clouds
     Up, my mind very light from my last night's accounts
     Upon a very small occasion had a difference again broke out
     Very angry we were, but quickly friends again
     Very high and very foule words from her to me
     We do nothing in this office like people able to carry on a warr
     Went against me to have my wife and servants look upon them
     What wine you drinke, lett it bee at meales
     What a sorry dispatch these great persons give to business
     What is there more to be had of a woman than the possessing her
     Where a trade hath once been and do decay, it never recovers
     Wherein every party has laboured to cheat another
     Willing to receive a bribe if it were offered me
     Would either conform, or be more wise, and not be catched!
     Would make a dogg laugh







End of Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, 1664, by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, 1664 ***

***** This file should be named 4153.txt or 4153.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/1/5/4153/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
