The Project Gutenberg EBook of A New Voyage to Carolina, by John Lawson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A New Voyage to Carolina

Author: John Lawson


Release date: July, 1999  [Etext #1838]
Last Updated: July 10, 2013

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A NEW VOYAGE TO CAROLINA ***




Produced by Alan R. Light






A NEW VOYAGE TO CAROLINA

By John Lawson

[British Surveyor-General of North Carolina.  d. 1711.]






                                     A New
                                    VOYAGE
                                      to
                                   CAROLINA;
                                Containing the
                     Exact Description and Natural History
                                    of that
                                   COUNTRY:
                   Together with the Present State thereof.
                                      And
                                   A JOURNAL
                  Of a Thousand Miles, Travel'd thro' several
                              Nations of INDIANS.
                 Giving a particular Account of their Customs,
                                 Manners, &c.

           By John Lawson, Gent. Surveyor-General of North Carolina.



TN: To assure a high quality text, the original was typed in (manually)
twice and electronically compared. [Some obvious errors have been
corrected.  (See Notes at end of file.)]


[Dedication]


        To His Excellency
WILLIAM Lord CRAVEN, Palatine;
The most Noble, HENRY Duke of BEAUFORT;
The Right Hon-ble JOHN Lord CARTERET;
The Hon-ble MAURICE ASHLEY, Esq;
Sir JOHN COLLETON, Baronet,
JOHN DANSON, Esq;

  And the rest of the True and Absolute
            LORDS-PROPRIETORS
                 of the
    Province of Carolina in America.


My Lords,

As Debts of Gratitude ought most punctually to be paid, so, where the Debtor
is uncapable of Payment, Acknowledgments ought, at least, to be made.
I cannot, in the least, pretend to retaliate Your Lordships Favours to me,
but must farther intrude on that Goodness of which I have already had
so good Experience, by laying these Sheets at Your Lordships Feet,
where they beg Protection, as having nothing to recommend them, but Truth;
a Gift which every Author may be Master of, if he will.

I here present Your Lordships with a Description of your own Country,
for the most part, in her Natural Dress, and therefore less vitiated
with Fraud and Luxury.  A Country, whose Inhabitants may enjoy
a Life of the greatest Ease and Satisfaction, and pass away their Hours
in solid Contentment.

Those Charms of Liberty and Right, the Darlings of an English Nature,
which Your Lordships grant and maintain, make you appear Noble Patrons
in the Eyes of all Men, and we a happy People in a Foreign Country;
which nothing less than Ingratitude and Baseness can make us disown.

As Heaven has been liberal in its Gifts, so are Your Lordships
favourable Promoters of whatever may make us an easy People;
which, I hope, Your Lordships will continue to us and our Posterity;
and that we and they may always acknowledge such Favours,
by banishing from among us every Principle which renders Men
factious and unjust, which is the hearty Prayer of,

                         My Lords,
                    Your Lordships most obliged,
                         most humble,
                              and most devoted Servant,
                                   JOHN LAWSON.





PREFACE.



'Tis a great Misfortune, that most of our Travellers, who go to
this vast Continent in America, are Persons of the meaner Sort,
and generally of a very slender Education; who being hir'd by the Merchants,
to trade amongst the Indians, in which Voyages they often spend
several Years, are yet, at their Return, uncapable of giving
any reasonable Account of what they met withal in those remote Parts;
tho' the Country abounds with Curiosities worthy a nice Observation.
In this Point, I think, the French outstrip us.

First, By their Numerous Clergy, their Missionaries being obedient
to their Superiors in the highest Degree, and that Obedience
being one great Article of their Vow, and strictly observ'd
amongst all their Orders.

Secondly, They always send abroad some of their Gentlemen
in Company of the Missionaries, who, upon their Arrival,
are order'd out into the Wilderness, to make Discoveries,
and to acquaint themselves with the Savages of America; and are oblig'd
to keep a strict Journal of all the Passages they meet withal,
in order to present the same not only to their Governors and Fathers,
but likewise to their Friends and Relations in France;
which is industriously spread about that Kingdom, to their Advantage.
For their Monarch being a very good Judge of Mens Deserts,
does not often let Money or Interest make Men of Parts give Place
to others of less Worth.  This breeds an Honourable Emulation amongst them,
to outdo one another, even in Fatigues, and Dangers; whereby they gain
a good Correspondence with the Indians, and acquaint themselves
with their Speech and Customs; and so make considerable Discoveries
in a short time.  Witness, their Journals from Canada, to the Missisipi,
and its several Branches, where they have effected great Matters,
in a few Years.

Having spent most of my Time, during my eight Years Abode in Carolina,
in travelling; I not only survey'd the Sea-Coast and those Parts
which are already inhabited by the Christians, but likewise view'd a spatious
Tract of Land, lying betwixt the Inhabitants and the Ledges of Mountains,
from whence our noblest Rivers have their Rise, running towards the Ocean,
where they water as pleasant a Country as any in Europe;
the Discovery of which being never yet made publick, I have,
in the following Sheets, given you a faithful Account thereof,
wherein I have laid down every thing with Impartiality, and Truth,
which is indeed, the Duty of every Author, and preferable to a smooth Stile,
accompany'd with Falsities and Hyperboles.

Great Part of this pleasant and healthful Country is inhabited
by none but Savages, who covet a Christian Neighbourhood,
for the Advantage of Trade, and enjoy all the Comforts of Life
free from Care and Want.

But not to amuse my Readers any longer with the Encomium of Carolina,
I refer 'em to my Journal, and other more particular Description
of that Country and its Inhabitants, which they will find
after the Natural History thereof, in which I have been very exact,
and for Method's sake, rang'd each Species under its distinct and proper Head.





INTRODUCTION.



In the Year 1700, when People flock'd from all Parts of the Christian World,
to see the Solemnity of the Grand Jubilee at Rome, my Intention,
at that Time, being to travel, I accidentally met with a Gentleman,
who had been Abroad, and was very well acquainted with the Ways of Living
in both Indies; of whom, having made Enquiry concerning them,
he assur'd me, that Carolina was the best Country I could go to;
and, that there then lay a Ship in the Thames, in which I might have
my Passage.  I laid hold on this Opportunity, and was not long on Board,
before we fell down the River, and sail'd to Cowes; where, having taken in
some Passengers, we proceeded on our Voyage 'till we sprung a-leak,
and were forc'd into the Islands of Scilly.  Here we spent about 10 Days
in refitting; in which Time we had a great deal of Diversion
in Fishing and Shooting on those rocky Islands.  The Inhabitants
were very courteous and civil, especially the Governor,
to whose good Company and Favour, we were very much oblig'd.
There is a Town on one of these Islands, where is good Entertainment
for those that happen to come in, though the Land is but mean,
and Flesh-meat not Plenty.  They have good Store of Rabbits, Quails, and Fish;
and you see at the poor Peoples Doors great Heaps of Perriwinkle-shells,
those Fish being a great Part of their Food.  On the 1st Day of May,
having a fair Wind at East, we put to Sea, and were on the Ocean
(without speaking to any Vessel, except a Ketch bound from New England
to Barbadoes, laden with Horses, Fish, and Provisions)
'till the latter End of July, when the Winds hung so much Southerly,
that we could not get to our Port, but put into Sandyhook-bay, and went up
to New York, after a pinching Voyage, caus'd by our long Passage.
We found at the Watering-Place, a French Man of War,
who had on Board Men and Necessaries to make a Colony,
and was intended for the Messiasippi River, there to settle.
The Country of New-York is very pleasant in Summer, but in the Winter
very cold, as all the Northern Plantations are.  Their chief Commodities
are Provisions, Bread, Beer, Lumber, and Fish in abundance;
all which are very good, and some Skins and Furrs are hence exported.
The City is govern'd by a Mayor, (as in England) is seated on an Island,
and lies very convenient for Trade and Defence, having a regular Fort,
and well mounted with Guns.  The Buildings are generally
of a smaller Sort of Flemish Brick, and of the Dutch Fashion,
(excepting some few Houses:)  They are all very firm and good Work,
and conveniently plac'd, as is likewise the Town, which gives
a very pleasant Prospect of the neighbouring Islands and Rivers.
A good Part of the Inhabitants are Dutch, in whose Hands
this Colony once was.  After a Fortnight's Stay here,
we put out from Sandyhook, and in 14 Days after, arriv'd at Charles-Town,
the Metropolis of South Carolina, which is soituate
in 32, 45 North Latitude, and admits of large Ships to come over their Bar
up to the Town, where is a very commodious Harbour, about 5 Miles distant
from the Inlet, and stands on a Point very convenient for Trade,
being seated between two pleasant and navigable Rivers.  The Town has
very regular and fair Streets, in which are good Buildings of Brick and Wood,
and since my coming thence, has had great Additions of beautiful,
large Brick-buildings, besides a strong Fort, and regular Fortifications made
to defend the Town.  The Inhabitants, by their wise Management and Industry,
have much improv'd the Country, which is in as thriving Circumstances
at this Time, as any Colony on the Continent of English America,
and is of more Advantage to the Crown of Great Britain, than any of
the other more Northerly Plantations, (Virginia and Maryland excepted.)
This Colony was at first planted by a genteel Sort of People,
that were well acquainted with Trade, and had either Money or Parts,
to make good Use of the Advantages that offer'd, as most of them have done,
by raising themselves to great Estates, and considerable Places of Trust,
and Posts of Honour, in this thriving Settlement.  Since the first Planters,
abundance of French and others have gone over, and rais'd themselves
to considerable Fortunes.  They are very neat and exact
in Packing and Shipping of their Commodities; which Method has got them
so great a Character Abroad, that they generally come to a good Market
with their Commodities; when oftentimes the Product of other Plantations,
are forc'd to be sold at lower Prizes.  They have a considerable Trade
both to Europe, and the West Indies, whereby they become rich,
and are supply'd with all Things necessary for Trade, and genteel Living,
which several other Places fall short of.  Their co-habiting in a Town,
has drawn to them ingenious People of most Sciences, whereby they have
Tutors amongst them that educate their Youth a-la-mode.

Their Roads, with great Industry, are made very good and pleasant.
Near the Town is built a fair Parsonage-house, with necessary Offices,
and the Minister has a very considerable Allowance from his Parish.
There is likewise a French Church in Town, of the Reform'd Religion,
and several Meeting-houses for dissenting Congregations, who all enjoy
at this Day an entire Liberty of their Worship; the Constitution
of this Government, allowing all Parties of well-meaning Christians
to enjoy a free Toleration, and possess the same Priviledges,
so long as they appear to behave themselves peaceably and well:
It being the Lords Proprietors Intent, that the Inhabitants of Carolina
should be as free from Oppression, as any in the Universe;
which doubtless they will, if their own Differences amongst themselves
do not occasion the contrary.

They have a well-disciplin'd Militia; their Horse are most Gentlemen,
and well mounted, and the best in America, and may equalize
any in other Parts:  Their Officers, both Infantry and Cavalry,
generally appear in scarlet Mountings, and as rich as in most Regiments
belonging to the Crown, which shews the Richness and Grandeur of this Colony.
They are a Fronteer, and prove such troublesome Neighbours to the Spaniards,
that they have once laid their Town of St. Augustine in Ashes,
and drove away their Cattle; besides many Encounters and Engagements,
in which they have defeated them, too tedious to relate here.
What the French got by their Attempt against South Carolina,
will hardly ever be rank'd amongst their Victories; their Admiral Mouville
being glad to leave the Enterprize, and run away, after he had suffer'd
all the Loss and Disgrace he was capable of receiving.  They are
absolute Masters over the Indians, and carry so strict a Hand
over such as are within the Circle of their Trade, that none does
the least Injury to any of the English, but he is presently sent for,
and punish'd with Death, or otherwise, according to the Nature of the Fault.
They have an entire Friendship with the neighbouring Indians
of several Nations, which are a very warlike People, ever faithful
to the English, and have prov'd themselves brave and true
on all Occasions; and are a great Help and Strength to this Colony.
The Chief of the savage Nations have heretofore groan'd
under the Spanish Yoke, and having experienc'd their Cruelty,
are become such mortal Enemies to that People, that they never give
a Spaniard Quarter; but generally, when they take any Prisoners,
(if the English be not near to prevent it) sculp them, that is,
to take their Hair and Skin of their Heads, which they often flea away,
whilst the Wretch is alive.  Notwithstanding the English have us'd
all their Endeavours, yet they could never bring them to leave
this Barbarity to the Spaniards; who, as they alledge,
use to murder them and their Relations, and make Slaves of them
to build their Forts and Towns.

This Place is more plentiful in Money, than most, or indeed
any of the Plantations on the Continent; besides, they build
a considerable Number of Vessels of Cedar, and other Wood,
with which they trade to Cuirassau, and the West Indies;
from one they bring Money, and from the other the Produce of their Islands,
which yields a necessary Supply of both to the Colony.  Their Stocks of Cattle
are incredible, being from one to two thousand Head in one Man's Possession:
These feed in the Savannas, and other Grounds, and need no Fodder
in the Winter.  Their Mutton and Veal is good, and their Pork is not inferior
to any in America.  As for Pitch and Tar, none of the Plantations
are comparable for affording the vast Quantities of Naval Stores,
as this Place does.  There have been heretofore some Discoveries of rich Mines
in the mountanous Part of this Country; but being remote from
the present Settlement, and the Inhabitants not well vers'd
in ordering Minerals, they have been laid aside 'till a more
fit Opportunity happens.  There are several noble Rivers,
and spacious Tracts of rich Land in their Lordships Dominions,
lying to the Southward, which are yet uninhabited, besides Port Royal,
a rare Harbour and Inlet, having many Inhabitants thereon,
which their Lordships have now made a Port for Trade.  This will be
a most advantageous Settlement, lying so commodiously for Ships
coming from the Gulph, and the Richness of the Land, which is reported
to be there.  These more Southerly Parts will afford Oranges, Limons,
Limes, and many other Fruits, which the Northerly Plantations yield not.

The Merchants of Carolina, are fair, frank Traders.  The Gentlemen
seated in the Country, are very courteous, live very nobly in their Houses,
and give very genteel Entertainment to all Strangers and others, that come
to visit them.  And since the Produce of South and North Carolina
is the same, unless Silk, which this Place produces great Quantities of,
and very good, North Carolina having never made any Tryal thereof as yet,
therefore I shall refer the natural Produce of this Country,
to that Part which treats of North Carolina, whose Productions
are much the same.  The Christian Inhabitants of both Colonies pretty equal,
but the Slaves of South Carolina are far more in Number than those
in the North.  I shall now proceed to relate my Journey thro' the Country,
from this Settlement to the other, and then treat of the natural History
of Carolina, with other remarkable Circumstances which I have met with,
during my eight Years Abode in that Country.





                                       A
                                    JOURNAL
                                      of
A thousand Miles Travel among the Indians, from South to North Carolina.



{Saturday.}
On December the 28th, 1700, I began my Voyage (for North Carolina)
from Charles-Town, being six English-men in Company,
with three Indian-men, and one Woman, Wife to our Indian-Guide,
having five Miles from the Town to the Breach we went down in a large Canoe,
that we had provided for our Voyage thither, having the Tide of Ebb
along with us; which was so far spent by that Time we got down,
that we had not Water enough for our Craft to go over, although we drew
but two Foot, or thereabouts.  This Breach is a Passage through a Marsh
lying to the Northward of Sullivans Island, the Pilot's having
a Look out thereon, lying very commodious for Mariners, (on that Coast)
making a good Land-Mark in so level a Country, this Bar being
difficult to hit, where an Observation hath been wanting for a Day or two;
North East Winds bringing great Fogs, Mists, and Rains;
which, towards the cool Months of October, November,
and until the latter End of March, often appear in these Parts.
There are three Pilots to attend, and conduct Ships over the Bar.
The Harbour where the Vessels generally ride, is against the Town
on Cooper's River, lying within a Point which parts that and Ashley-River,
they being Land lock'd almost on all Sides.

At 4 in the Afternoon, (at half Flood) we pass'd with our Canoe
over the Breach, leaving Sullivans Island on our Starboard.
The first Place we design'd for, was Santee River, on which
there is a Colony of French Protestants, allow'd and encourag'd
by the Lords Proprietors.  At Night we got to Bell's-Island,
a poor Spot of Land, being about ten Miles round, where liv'd (at that Time)
a Bermudian, being employ'd here with a Boy, to look after
a Stock of Cattle and Hogs, by the Owner of this Island.
One Side of the Roof of his House was thatch'd with Palmeto-leaves,
the other open to the Heavens, thousands of Musketoes, and other
troublesome Insects, tormenting both Man and Beast inhabiting these Islands.
{Palmeto-trees.}  The Palmeto-trees, whose Leaves growing only
on the Top of the Tree, in the Shape of a Fan, and in a Cluster,
like a Cabbage; this Tree in Carolina, when at its utmost Growth,
is about forty or fifty Foot in Height, and two Foot through:
It's worth mentioning, that the Growth of the Tree is not perceivable
in the Age of any Man, the Experiment having been often try'd in Bermudas,
and elsewhere, which shews the slow Growth of this Vegitable,
the Wood of it being porous and stringy, like some Canes;
the Leaves thereof the Bermudians make Womens Hats, Bokeets,
Baskets, and pretty Dressing-boxes, a great deal being transported
to Pensilvania, and other Northern Parts of America,
(where they do not grow) for the same Manufacture.  The People of Carolina
make of the Fans of this Tree, Brooms very serviceable,
to sweep their Houses withal.

We took up our Lodging this Night with the Bermudian; our Entertainment
was very indifferent, there being no fresh Water to be had on the Island.

The next Morning we set away thro' the Marshes; about Noon we reach'd
another Island, call'd Dix's Island, much like to the former, tho' larger;
there liv'd an honest Scot, who gave us the best Reception
his Dwelling afforded, being well provided of Oat-meal,
and several other Effects he had found on that Coast;
which Goods belong'd to that unfortunate Vessel, the Rising Sun,
a Scotch Man of War, lately arriv'd from the Istmus of Darien,
and cast away near the Bar of Ashley River, the September before,
Capt. Gibson of Glasco then commanding her, who, with above an hundred Men
then on Board her, {Septem. 5. 1700.} were every Soul drown'd
in that terrible Gust which then happen'd; most of the Corps being taken up,
were carefully interr'd by Mr. Graham, their Lieutenant, who happily
was on Shore during the Tempest.

After Dinner, we left our Scotch Landlord, and went that Night
to the North East Point of the Island:  It being dark ere we got there,
our Canoe struck on a Sand near the Breakers, and were in great Danger
of our Lives, but (by God's Blessing) got off safe to the Shore,
where we lay all Night.

{Monday.}
In the Morning we set forwards on our intended Voyage.  About two a Clock
we got to Bulls Island, which is about thirty Miles long,
and hath a great Number of both Cattel and Hogs upon it;
the Cattel being very wild, and the Hogs very lean.  These two last Islands
belong to one Colonel Cary, an Inhabitant of South Carolina.
Although it were Winter, yet we found such Swarms of Musketoes,
and other troblesome Insects, that we got but little Rest that Night.

{Tuesday.}
The next Day we intended for a small Island on the other Side of Sewee-Bay,
which joining to these Islands, Shipping might come to victual or careen;
but there being such a Burden of those Flies, that few or none
cares to settle there; so the Stock thereon are run wild.
We were gotten about half Way to Racoon-Island, when there sprung up
a tart Gale at N.W. which put us in some Danger of being cast away,
the Bay being rough, and there running great Seas between the two Islands,
which are better than four Leagues asunder, a strong Current of a Tide
setting in and out, which made us turn Tail to it, and got our Canoe
right before the Wind, and came safe into a Creek that is joining to
the North End of Bulls Island.  We sent our Indians to hunt,
who brought us two Deers, which were very poor, and their Maws
full of large Grubs.

{Wednesday.}
On the Morrow we went and visited the Eastermost Side of this Island,
it joining to the Ocean, having very fair sandy Beeches,
pav'd with innumerable Sorts of curious pretty Shells, very pleasant
to the Eye.  Amongst the rest, we found the Spanish Oyster-Shell,
whence come the Pearls.  They are very large, and of a different Form
from other Oysters; their Colour much resembles the Tortoise-Shell,
when it is dress'd.  There was left by the Tide several strange Species
of a muciligmous slimy Substance, though living, and very aptly mov'd
at their first Appearance; yet, being left on the dry Sand,
(by the Beams of the Sun) soon exhale and vanish.

At our Return to our Quarters, the Indians had kill'd two more Deer,
two wild Hogs, and three Racoons, all very lean, except the Racoons.
We had great Store of Oysters, Conks, and Clanns, a large Sort of Cockles.
These Parts being very well furnish'd with Shell-Fish,
Turtle of several Sorts, but few or none of the green,
with other Sorts of Salt-water Fish, and in the Season, good Plenty of Fowl,
as Curleus, Gulls, Gannets, and Pellicans, besides Duck and Mallard,
Geese, Swans, Teal, Widgeon, &c.

{Thursday.}
On Thursday Morning we left Bulls Island, and went thro' the Creeks,
which lie between the Bay and the main Land.  At Noon we went on Shore,
and got our Dinner near a Plantation, on a Creek having
the full Prospect of Sewee-Bay:  We sent up to the House,
but found none at Home, but a Negro, of whom our Messenger purchas'd some
small Quantity of Tobacco and Rice.  We came to a deserted Indian Residence,
call'd Avendaugh-bough, where we rested that Night.

{Friday.}
The next Day we enter'd Santee-River's Mouth, where is fresh Water,
occasion'd by the extraordinary Current that comes down continually.
With hard Rowing, we got two Leagues up the River, lying all Night
in a swampy Piece of Ground, the Weather being so cold all that Time,
we were almost frozen ere Morning, leaving the Impressions of our Bodies
on the wet Ground.  We set forward very early in the Morning,
to seek some better Quarters.

{Saturday.}
As we row'd up the River, we found the Land towards the Mouth,
and for about sixteen Miles up it, scarce any Thing but Swamp and Percoarson,
{Percoarson, a Sort of low Land.} affording vast Ciprus-Trees,
of which the French make Canoes, that will carry fifty or sixty Barrels.
After the Tree is moulded and dug, they saw them in two Pieces,
and so put a Plank between, and a small Keel, to preserve them
from the Oyster-Banks, which are innumerable in the Creeks and Bays
betwixt the French Settlement and Charles-Town.  They carry two Masts,
and Bermudas Sails, which makes them very handy and fit for their Purpose;
for although their River fetches its first Rise from the Mountains,
and continues a Current some hundreds of Miles ere it disgorges it self,
having no sound Bay or Sand-Banks betwixt the Mouth thereof, and the Ocean.
Notwithstanding all this, with the vast Stream it affords at all Seasons,
and the repeated Freshes it so often allarms the Inhabitants with,
by laying under Water great Part of their Country, yet the Mouth is barr'd,
affording not above four or five Foot Water at the Entrance.
As we went up the River, we heard a great Noise, as if two Parties
were engag'd against each other, seeming exactly like small Shot.
{Sewee Indians.}  When we approach'd nearer the Place, we found it to be
some Sewee Indians firing the Canes Swamps, which drives out the Game,
then taking their particular Stands, kill great Quantities of both Bear, Deer,
Turkies, and what wild Creatures the Parts afford.

These Sewees have been formerly a large Nation, though now
very much decreas'd, since the English hath seated their Land,
and all other Nations of Indians are observ'd to partake of the same Fate,
where the Europeans come, the Indians being a People
very apt to catch any Distemper they are afflicted withal;
the Small-Pox has destroy'd many thousands of these Natives,
who no sooner than they are attack'd with the violent Fevers,
and the Burning which attends that Distemper, fling themselves over Head
in the Water, in the very Extremity of the Disease; which shutting up
the Pores, hinders a kindly Evacuation of the pestilential Matter,
and drives it back; by which Means Death most commonly ensues;
not but in other Distempers which are epidemical, you may find among 'em
Practitioners that have extraordinary Skill and Success in removing
those morbifick Qualities which afflict 'em, not often going above 100 Yards
from their Abode for their Remedies, some of their chiefest Physicians
commonly carrying their Compliment of Drugs continually about them,
which are Roots, Barks, Berries, Nuts, &c. that are strung upon a Thread.
So like a Pomander, the Physician wears them about his Neck.
An Indian hath been often found to heal an English-man of a Malady,
for the Value of a Match-Coat; which the ablest of our English Pretenders
in America, after repeated Applications, have deserted the Patient
as incurable; God having furnish'd every Country with specifick Remedies
for their peculiar Diseases.

{Rum.}
Rum, a Liquor now so much in Use with them, that they will part with
the dearest Thing they have, to purchase it; and when they have got a little
in their Heads, are the impatients Creatures living, 'till they have enough
to make 'em quite drunk; and the most miserable Spectacles when they are so,
some falling into the Fires, burn their Legs or Arms, contracting the Sinews,
and become Cripples all their Life-time; others from Precipices break
their Bones and Joints, with abundance of Instances, yet none are so great
to deter them from that accurs'd Practice of Drunkenness, though sensible
how many of them (are by it) hurry'd into the other World before their Time,
as themselves oftentimes will confess.  The Indians, I was now speaking of,
were not content with the common Enemies that lessen and destroy
their Country-men, but invented an infallible Stratagem to purge their Tribe,
and reduce their Multitude into far less Numbers.  Their Contrivance was thus,
as a Trader amongst them inform'd me.

They seeing several Ships coming in, to bring the English Supplies
from Old England, one chief Part of their Cargo being for a Trade
with the Indians, some of the craftiest of them had observ'd,
that the Ships came always in at one Place, which made them very confident
that Way was the exact Road to England; and seeing so many Ships
come thence, they believ'd it could not be far thither,
esteeming the English that were among them, no better than Cheats,
and thought, if they could carry the Skins and Furs they got,
themselves to England, which were inhabited with a better Sort of People
than those sent amongst them, that then they should purchase
twenty times the Value for every Pelt they sold Abroad,
in Consideration of what Rates they sold for at Home.  The intended Barter
was exceeding well approv'd of, and after a general Consultation
of the ablest Heads amongst them, it was, `Nemine Contradicente',
agreed upon, immediately to make an Addition of their Fleet,
by building more Canoes, and those to be of the best Sort,
and biggest Size, as fit for their intended Discovery.  Some Indians
were employ'd about making the Canoes, others to hunting,
every one to the Post he was most fit for, all Endeavours tending towards
an able Fleet and Cargo for Europe.  The Affair was carry'd on
with a great deal of Secrecy and Expedition, so as in a small Time
they had gotten a Navy, Loading, Provisions, and Hands ready
to set Sail, leaving only the Old, Impotent, and Minors at Home,
'till their successful Return.  {They never hearing more of their Fleet.}
The Wind presenting, they set up their Mat-Sails, and were scarce
out of Sight, when there rose a Tempest, which it's suppos'd
carry'd one Part of these Indian Merchants, by Way of the other World,
whilst the others were taken up at Sea by an English Ship,
and sold for Slaves to the Islands.  The Remainder are better satisfy'd
with their Imbecilities in such an Undertaking, nothing affronting them more,
than to rehearse their Voyage to England.

There being a strong Current in Santee-River, caus'd us to make
small Way with our Oars.  With hard Rowing, we got that Night
to Mons. Eugee's House, which stands about fifteen Miles up the River,
being the first Christian dwelling we met withal in that Settlement,
and were very courteously receiv'd by him and his Wife.

Many of the French follow a Trade with the Indians,
living very conveniently for that Interest.  There is about seventy Families
seated on this River, who live as decently and happily, as any Planters
in these Southward Parts of America.  The French being
a temperate industrious People, some of them bringing very little of Effects,
yet by their Endeavours and mutual Assistance amongst themselves,
(which is highly to be commended) have out-stript our English,
who brought with 'em larger Fortunes, though (as it seems) less endeavour
to manage their Talent to the best Advantage.  'Tis admirable to see
what Time and Industry will (with God's Blessing) effect.
Carolina affording many strange Revolutions in the Age of a Man,
daily Instances presenting themselves to our View, of so many,
from despicable Beginnings, which in a short Time arrive
to very splended Conditions.  Here Propriety hath a large Scope,
there being no strict Laws to bind our Privileges.  A Quest after Game,
being as freely and peremptorily enjoy'd by the meanest Planter,
as he that is the highest in Dignity, or wealthiest in the Province.
Deer, and other Game that are naturally wild, being not immur'd,
or preserv'd within Boundaries, to satisfy the Appetite of the Rich alone.
A poor Labourer, that is Master of his Gun, &c. hath as good a Claim
to have continu'd Coarses of Delicacies crouded upon his Table,
as he that is Master of a greater Purse.

We lay all that Night at Mons. Eugee's, and the next Morning
set out farther, to go the Remainder of our Voyage by Land:
At ten a Clock we pass'd over a narrow, deep Swamp, having left
the three Indian Men and one Woman, that had pilotted the Canoe
from Ashly-River, having hir'd a Sewee-Indian, a tall, lusty Fellow,
who carry'd a Pack of our Cloaths, of great Weight;
notwithstanding his Burden, we had much a-do to keep pace with him.
At Noon we came up with several French Plantations, meeting with
several Creeks by the Way, the French were very officious
in assisting with their small Dories to pass over these Waters,
(whom we met coming from their Church) being all of them
very clean and decent in their Apparel; their Houses and Plantations
suitable in Neatness and Contrivance.  They are all of the same Opinion
with the Church of Geneva, there being no Difference amongst them
concerning the Punctilio's of their Christian Faith; which Union
hath propagated a happy and delightful Concord in all other Matters
throughout the whole Neighbourhood; living amongst themselves as one Trible,
or Kindred, every one making it his Business to be assistant
to the Wants of his Country-man, preserving his Estate and Reputation
with the same Exactness and Concern as he does his own; all seeming
to share in the Misfortunes, and rejoyce at the Advance, and Rise,
of their Brethren.

Towards the Afternoon, we came to Mons. L'Jandro, where we got our Dinner;
there coming some French Ladies whilst we were there,
who were lately come from England, and Mons. L'Grand, a worthy Norman,
who hath been a great Sufferer in his Estate, by the Persecution in France,
against those of the Protestant Religion:  This Gentleman very kindly
invited us to make our Stay with him all Night, but we being intended farther
that Day, took our Leaves, returning Acknowledgments of their Favours.

About 4 in the Afternoon, we pass'd over a large Ciprus run
in a small Canoe; the French Doctor sent his Negro to guide us
over the Head of a large Swamp; so we got that Night
to Mons. Galliar's the elder, who lives in a very curious contriv'd House,
built of Brick and Stone, which is gotten near that Place.  Near here comes in
the Road from Charles-Town, and the rest of the English Settlement,
it being a very good Way by Land, and not above 36 Miles,
altho' more than 100 by Water; and I think the most difficult Way I ever saw,
occasion'd by Reason of the multitude of Creeks lying along the Main,
keeping their Course thro' the Marshes, turning and winding
like a Labyrinth, having the Tide of Ebb and Flood twenty Times
in less than three Leagues going.

{Monday.}
The next Morning very early, we ferry'd over a Creek that runs near the House;
and, after an Hour's Travel in the Woods, we came to the River-side,
where we stay'd for the Indian, who was our Guide, and was gone round
by Water in a small Canoe, to meet us at that Place we rested at.
He came after a small Time, and ferry'd us in that little Vessel
over Santee River 4 Miles, and 84 Miles in the Woods,
which the over-flowing of the Freshes, which then came down,
had made a perfect Sea of, there running an incredible Current in the River,
which had cast our small Craft, and us, away, had we not had
this Sewee Indian with us; who are excellent Artists in managing
these small Canoes.

Santee River, at this Time, (from the usual Depth of Water)
was risen perpendicular 36 Foot, always making a Breach from her Banks,
about this Season of the Year:  The general Opinion of the Cause thereof,
is suppos'd to proceed from the overflowing of fresh Water-Lakes
that lie near the Head of this River, and others, upon the same Continent:
But my Opinion is, that these vast Inundations proceed from
the great and repeated Quantities of Snow that falls upon the Mountains,
which lie at so great a Distance from the Sea, therefore they have
no Help of being dissolv'd by those saline, piercing Particles,
as other adjacent Parts near the Ocean receive; and therefore
lies and increases to a vast Bulk, until some mild Southerly Breezes
coming on a sudden, continue to unlock these frozen Bodies,
congeal'd by the North-West Wind, dissipating them in Liquids;
and coming down with Impetuosity, fills those Branches that feed these Rivers,
and causes this strange Deluge, which oft-times lays under Water
the adjacent Parts on both Sides this Current, for several Miles distant
from her Banks; tho' the French and Indians affir'm'd to me,
they never knew such an extraordinary Flood there before.

We all, by God's Blessing, and the Endeavours of our Indian-Pilot,
pass'd safe over the River, but was lost in the Woods, which seem'd like
some great Lake, except here and there a Knowl of high Land,
which appear'd above Water.

We intended for Mons. Galliar's, jun', but was lost, none of us
knowing the Way at that Time, altho' the Indian was born in that Country,
it having receiv'd so strange a Metamorphosis.  We were in several Opinions
concerning the right Way, the Indian and my self, suppos'd the House
to bear one Way, the rest thought to the contrary; we differing,
it was agreed on amongst us, that one half should go with the Indian
to find the House, and the other part to stay upon one of these dry Spots,
until some of them return'd to us, and inform'd us where it lay.

My self and two more were left behind, by Reason the Canoe
would not carry us all; we had but one Gun amongst us, one Load of Ammunition,
and no Provision.  Had our Men in the Canoe miscarry'd,
we must (in all Probability) there have perish'd.

In about six Hours Time, from our Mens Departure, the Indian came back to us
in the same Canoe he went in, being half drunk, which assur'd us
they had found some Place of Refreshment.  He took us three into the Canoe,
telling us all was well:  Padling our Vessel several Miles thro' the Woods,
being often half full of Water; but at length we got safe to the Place
we sought for, which prov'd to lie the same Way the Indian and I
guess'd it did.

When we got to the House, we found our Comrades in the same Trim
the Indian was in, and several of the French Inhabitants with them,
who treated us very courteously, wondering at our undertaking such a Voyage,
thro' a Country inhabited by none but Savages, and them of so different
Nations and Tongues.

After we had refresh'd our selves, we parted from a very kind, loving,
and affable People, who wish'd us a safe and prosperous Voyage.

Hearing of a Camp of Santee Indians not far of, we set out
intending to take up our Quarters with them that Night.  There being
a deep Run of Water in the Way, one of our Company being top-heavy,
and there being nothing but a small Pole for a Bridge, over a Creek,
fell into the Water up to the Chin; my self laughing at the Accident,
and not taking good Heed to my Steps, came to the same Misfortune:
All our Bedding was wet.  The Wind being at N.W. it froze very hard,
which prepar'd such a Night's Lodging for me, that I never desire
to have the like again; the wet Bedding and freezing Air
had so qualify'd our Bodies, that in the Morning when we awak'd,
we were nigh frozen to Death, until we had recruited our selves
before a large Fire of the Indians.

{Tuesday.}
Tuesday Morning we set towards the Congerees, leaving the Indian Guide
Scipio drunk amongst the Santee-Indians.  We went ten Miles
out of our Way, to head a great Swamp, the Freshes having fill'd them all
with such great Quantities of Water, that the usual Paths
were render'd unpassable.  We met in our Way with an Indian Hut,
where we were entertain'd with a fat, boil'd Goose, Venison, Racoon,
and ground Nuts.  We made but little Stay; about Noon, we pass'd by
several large Savannah's, wherein is curious Ranges for Cattel,
being green all the Year; they were plentifully stor'd with Cranes,
Geese, &c. and the adjacent Woods with great Flocks of Turkies.
This Day we travell'd about 30 Miles, and lay all Night at a House
which was built for the Indian Trade, the Master thereof
we had parted with at the French Town, who gave us Leave
to make use of his Mansion.  Such Houses are common in these Parts,
and especially where there is Indian Towns, and Plantations near at hand,
which this Place is well furnish'd withal.

These Santee-Indians are a well-humour'd and affable People;
and living near the English, are become very tractable.
They make themselves Cribs after a very curious Manner,
wherein they secure their Corn from Vermin; which are more frequent
in these warm Climates, than Countries more distant from the Sun.
These pretty Fabricks are commonly supported with eight Feet or Posts,
about seven Foot high from the Ground, well daub'd within and without
upon Laths, with Loom or Clay, which makes them tight, and fit to keep out
the smallest Insect, there being a small Door at the gable End,
which is made of the same Composition, and to be remov'd at Pleasure,
being no bigger, than that a slender Man may creep in at,
cementing the Door up with the same Earth, when they take Corn
out of the Crib, and are going from Home, always finding their Granaries
in the same Posture they left them; Theft to each other being
altogether unpractis'd, never receiving Spoils but from Foreigners.

Hereabouts the Ground is something higher than about Charles-Town,
there being found some Quarries of brown free Stone, which I have seen
made Use of for Building, and hath prov'd very durable and good.
The Earth here is mix'd with white Gravel, which is rare,
there being nothing like a Stone to be found, of the natural Produce,
near to Ashly-River.

{Wednesday.}
The next Day about Noon we came to the Side of a great Swamp,
where we were forc'd to strip our selves to get over it,
which, with much Difficulty, we effected.  {Septem. 5. 1700.}
Hereabouts the late Gust of Wind, which happen'd in September last,
had torn the large Ciprus-Trees and Timbers up by the Roots,
they lying confusedly in their Branches, did block up the Way,
making the Passage very difficult.

This Night we got to one Scipio's Hutt, a famous Hunter:
There was no Body at Home; but we having (in our Company)
one that had us'd to trade amongst them, we made our selves welcome
to what his Cabin afforded, (which is a Thing common)
the Indians allowing it practicable to the English Traders,
to take out of their Houses what they need in their Absence,
in Lieu whereof they most commonly leave some small Gratuity of Tobacco,
Paint, Beads, &c.  We found great Store of Indian Peas, (a very good Pulse)
Beans, Oyl, Thinkapin Nuts, Corn, barbacu'd Peaches, and Peach-Bread;
which Peaches being made into a Quiddony, and so made up into Loves
like Barley-Cakes, these cut into thin Slices, and dissolv'd in Water,
makes a very grateful Acid, and extraordinary beneficial in Fevers,
as hath often been try'd, and approv'd on by our English Practitioners.
The Wind being at N.W. with cold Weather, made us make a large Fire
in the Indian's Cabin; being very intent upon our Cookery,
we set the Dwelling on Fire, and with much ado, put it out,
tho' with the Loss of Part of the Roof.

{Thursday.}
The next Day we travell'd on our Way, and about Noon came up
with a Settlement of Santee Indians, there being Plantations
lying scattering here and there, for a great many Miles.
They came out to meet us, being acquainted with one of our Company,
and made us very welcome with fat barbacu'd Venison,
which the Woman of the Cabin took and tore in Pieces with her Teeth,
so put it into a Mortar, beating it to Rags, afterwards stews it with Water,
and other Ingredients, which makes a very savoury Dish.

At these Cabins came to visit us the King of the Santee Nation.
He brought with him their chief Doctor or Physician, who was warmly and neatly
clad with a Match-Coat, made of Turkies Feathers, which makes a pretty Shew,
seeming as if it was a Garment of the deepest silk Shag.
This Doctor had the Misfortune to lose his Nose by the Pox,
which Disease the Indians often get by the English Traders
that use amongst them; not but the Natives of America have for many Ages
(by their own Confession) been afflicted with a Distemper
much like the Lues Venerea, which hath all the Symptoms of the Pox,
being different in this only; for I never could learn,
that this Country-Distemper, or Yawes, is begun or continu'd
with a Gonorrhoea; yet is attended with nocturnal Pains in the Limbs,
and commonly makes such a Progress, as to vent Part of the Matter by Botches,
and several Ulcers in the Body, and other Parts; oftentimes Death ensuing.
I have known mercurial Unguents and Remedies work a Cure,
following the same Methods as in the Pox; several white People,
but chiefly the Criolo's, losing their Palates and Noses
by this devouring Vulture.

It is epidemical, visiting these Parts of America, which is often occasion'd
thro' the immoderate drinking of Rum, by those that commonly drink Water
at other Times, cold Nights Lodging, and bad open Houses, and more chiefly
by often wetting the Feet, and eating such Quantities of Pork as they do,
which is a gross Food, and a great Propagator of such Juices
as it often meets withal in human Bodies, once tainted with this Malady;
which may differently (in some Respects) act its Tragedy;
the Change being occasion'd by the Difference of Climates and Bodies,
as in Europe.  We being well enough assur'd that the Pox had its first Rise
(known to us) in this new World, it being caught of the Indian Women,
by the Spanish Soldiers that follow'd Columbus in one of his Expeditions
to America; who after their Arrival in Old Spain, were hasten'd
to the Relief of Naples, at that Time besieg'd by the French.
Provisions growing scarce, the useless People were turn'd out of the City,
to lessen the Mouths; amongst these, the Curtesans were one Part,
who had frequently embrac'd the Spaniards, being well fraught with Riches
by their new Discovery.  The Leager Ladies had no sooner lost
their Spanish Dons, but found themselves as well entertain'd
by the French, whose Camp they traded in, giving the Mounsieurs
as large a Share of the pocky Spoils within their own Lines,
as the Spaniards had, who took the Pains to bring it in their Breeches
as far as from America; the large Supplies of Swines Flesh,
which that Army was chiefly victuall'd withal, made it rage.
The Siege was rais'd; the French and Spaniards retreating to Flanders,
which was a Parrade of all Nations; by which Means, this filthy Distemper
crowded it self into most Nations of the known World.

Now to return to our Doctor, who in the Time of his Affliction
withdrew himself (with one that labour'd under the same Distemper)
into the Woods.  These two perfected their Cures by
proper Vegitables, &c. of which they have Plenty, and are well acquainted
with their specifick Virtue.

I have seen such admirable Cures perform'd by these Savages, which would
puzzle a great many graduate Practitioners to trace their Steps in Healing,
with the same Expedition, Ease, and Success; using no racking Instruments
in their Chirurgery, nor nice Rules of Diet and Physick, to verify the Saying,
`qui Medice vivit, misere vivit'.  In Wounds which penetrate deep,
and seem mortal, they order a spare Diet, with drinking Fountain-water;
if they perceive a white Matter, or Pus to arise, they let the Patient
more at large, and presently cure him.

After these two had perform'd their Cures at no easier Rate
than the Expence of both their Noses, coming again amongst
their old Acquaintance so disfigur'd, the Indians admir'd to see them
metamorphos'd after that manner; enquir'd of them where they had been
all that Time, and what were become of their Noses?  They made Answer,
That they had been conversing with the white Man above,
(meaning God Almighty) how they were very kindly entertain'd
by that Great Being; he being much pleas'd with their Ways,
and had promis'd to make their Capacities equal with the white People
in making Guns, Ammunition, &c. in Retalliation of which,
they had given him their Noses.  The Verity of which, they yet hold,
the Indians being an easy, credulous People, and most notoriously cheated
by their Priests and Conjurers, both Trades meeting ever in one Person,
and most commonly a Spice of Quackship added to the other two Ingredients,
which renders that cunning Knave the Impostor to be more rely'd upon;
thence a fitter Instrument to cheat these ignorant People;
the Priest and Conjurers being never admitted to their Practice,
'till Years and the Experience of repeated Services hath wrought their Esteem
amongst the Nations they belong to.

The Santee King, who was in Company with this No-nos'd Doctor,
is the most absolute Indian Ruler in these Parts, although he is Head
but of a small People, in Respect to some other Nations of Indians,
that I have seen:  He can put any of his People to Death that hath committed
any Fault which he judges worthy of so great a Punishment.
This Authority is rarely found amongst these Savages,
for they act not (commonly) by a determinative Voice in their Laws,
towards any one that hath committed Murder, or such other great Crime,
but take this Method; him to whom the Injury was done, or if dead,
the nearest of his Kindred prosecutes by Way of an actual Revenge,
being himself, if Opportunity serves his Intent, both Judge and Executioner,
performing so much Mischief on the Offender, or his nearest Relation,
until such Time that he is fully satisfy'd:  Yet this Revenge
is not so infallible, but it may be bought off with Beads, Tobacco,
and such like Commodities that are useful amongst them,
though it were the most sable Villany that could be acted by Mankind.

Some that attended the King, presented me with an odoriferous, balsamick Root,
of a fragrant Smell and Taste, the Name I know not; they chew it in the Mouth,
and by that simple Application, heal desperate Wounds both green and old;
that small Quantity I had, was given inwardly to those troubl'd
with the Belly-ach, which Remedy fail'd not to give present Help,
the Pain leaving the Patient soon after they had taken the Root.

Near to these Cabins are several Tombs made after the manner
of these Indians; the largest and the chiefest of them
was the Sepulchre of the late Indian King of the Santees,
a Man of great Power, not only amongst his own Subjects,
but dreaded by the neighbouring Nations for his great Valour and Conduct,
having as large a Prerogative in his Way of Ruling, as the present King
I now spoke of.

The manner of their Interment, is thus:  A Mole or Pyramid of Earth
is rais'd, the Mould thereof being work'd very smooth and even,
sometimes higher or lower, according to the Dignity of the Person
whose Monument it is.  On the Top thereof is an Umbrella, made Ridge-ways,
like the Roof of an House; this is supported by nine Stakes, or small Posts,
the Grave being about six or eight Foot in Length, and four Foot in Breadth;
about it is hung Gourds, Feathers, and other such like Trophies,
plac'd there by the dead Man's Relations, in Respect to him in the Grave.
The other Part of the Funeral-Rites are thus, As soon as the Party is dead,
they lay the Corps upon a Piece of Bark in the Sun, seasoning or embalming it
with a small Root beaten to Powder, which looks as red as Vermilion;
the same is mix'd with Bear's Oil, to beautify the Hair,
and preserve their Heads from being lousy, it growing plentifully
in these Parts of America.  After the Carcass has laid a Day or two
in the Sun, they remove and lay it upon Crotches cut on purpose
for the Support thereof from the Earth; then they anoint it all over
with the fore-mention'd Ingredients of the Powder of this Root,
and Bear's Oil.  When it is so done, they cover it very exactly over
with Bark of the Pine or Cyprus Tree, to prevent any Rain to fall upon it,
sweeping the Ground very clean all about it.  Some of his nearest of Kin
brings all the temporal Estate he was possess'd of at his Death,
as Guns, Bows, and Arrows, Beads, Feathers, Match-coat, &c.  This Relation
is the chief Mourner, being clad in Moss, and a Stick in his Hand,
keeping a mournful Ditty for three or four Days, his Face being black
with the Smoak of Pitch, Pine, mingl'd with Bear's Oil.  All the while
he tells the dead Man's Relations, and the rest of the Spectators,
who that dead Person was, and of the great Feats perform'd in his Life-time;
all what he speaks, tending to the Praise of the Defunct.
As soon as the Flesh grows mellow, and will cleave from the Bone,
they get it off, and burn it, making all the Bones very clean,
then anoint them with the Ingredients aforesaid, wrapping up the Skull
(very carefully) in a Cloath artificially woven of Possums Hair.
(These Indians make Girdles, Sashes, Garters, &c. after the same Manner.)
The Bones they carefully preserve in a wooden Box, every Year
oiling and cleansing them:  By these Means preserve them for many Ages,
that you may see an Indian in Possession of the Bones of his Grand-father,
or some of his Relations of a larger Antiquity.  They have other
Sorts of Tombs; as where an Indian is slain, in that very Place
they make a Heap of Stones, (or Sticks, where Stones are not to be found;)
to this Memorial, every Indian that passes by, adds a Stone,
to augment the Heap, in Respect to the deceas'd Hero.

We had a very large Swamp to pass over near the House, and would have hir'd
our Landlord to have been our Guide, but he seem'd unwilling;
so we press'd him no farther about it.  He was the tallest Indian
I ever saw, being seven Foot high, and a very strait compleat Person,
esteem'd on by the King for his great Art in Hunting, always carrying with him
an artificial Head to hunt withal:  They are made of the Head of a Buck,
the back Part of the Horns being scrapt and hollow, for Lightness of Carriage.
The Skin is left to the setting on of the Shoulders, which is lin'd all round
with small Hoops, and flat Sort of Laths, to hold it open
for the Arm to go in.  They have a Way to preserve the Eyes, as if living.
The Hunter puts on a Match-coat made of Deer's Skin, with the Hair on,
and a Piece of the white Part of a Deer's Skin, that grows on the Breast,
which is fasten'd to the Neck-End of this stalking Head, so hangs down.
In these Habiliments an Indian will go as near a Deer as he pleases,
the exact Motions and Behaviour of a Deer being so well counterfeited by 'em,
that several Times it hath been known for two Hunters to come up
with a stalking Head together, and unknown to each other,
so that they have kill'd an Indian instead of a Deer,
which hath happen'd sometimes to be a Brother, or some dear Friend;
for which Reason they allow not of that Sort of Practice,
where the Nation is populous.

Within half a Mile of the House, we pass'd over a prodigious
wide and deep Swamp, being forc'd to strip stark-naked,
and much a-do to save our selves from drowning in this Fatiegue.
We, with much a-do, got thro', going that Day about five Miles farther,
and came to three more Indian Cabins, call'd in the Indian Tongue,
Hickerau, by the English Traders, the black House, being pleasantly
seated on a high Bank, by a Branch of Santee-River.  One of our Company,
that had traded amongst these Indians, told us, That one of the Cabins
was his Father's-in-Law; he call'd him so, by Reason the old Man had given him
a young Indian Girl, that was his Daughter, to lie with him, make Bread,
and to be necessary in what she was capable to assist him in,
during his Abode amongst them.

When we came thither first, there was no Body at Home, so the Son made bold
to search his Father's Granary for Corn, and other Provisions.
He brought us some Indian Maiz and Peas, which are of a reddish Colour,
and eat well, yet colour the Liquor they are boil'd in,
as if it were a Lixivium of red Tartar.  After we had been
about an Hour in the House, where was Millions of Fleas,
the Indian Cabins being often fuller of such Vermin, than any Dog-Kennel,
the old Man came in to us, and seem'd very glad to see his Son-in-Law.

This Indian is a great Conjurer, as appears by the Sequel.
The Seretee or Santee Indians were gone to War against
the Hooks and Backhooks Nations, living near the Mouth of Winyan-River.
Those that were left at Home, (which are commonly old People and Children)
had heard no News a long Time of their Men at Arms.  This Man,
at the Entreaty of these People, (being held to be a great Sorcerer
amongst 'em) went to know what Posture their fighting Men were in.
His Exorcism was carry'd on thus:  He dress'd himself in a clean white
dress'd Deer-Skin; a great Fire being made in the Middle of the Plantation,
the Indians sitting all round it, the Conjurer was blind-folded,
then he surrounded the Fire several Times, I think thrice;
leaving the Company, he went into the Woods, where he stay'd
about half an Hour, returning to them, surrounded the Fire as before;
leaving them, went the second Time into the Woods; at which Time there came
a huge Swarm of Flies, very large, they flying about the Fire several Times,
at last fell all into it, and were visibly consum'd.  Immediately after
the Indian-Conjurer made a huge Lilleloo, and howling very frightfully,
presently an Indian went and caught hold of him, leading him to the Fire.
The old Wizard was so feeble and weak, being not able to stand alone,
and all over in a Sweat, and as wet as if he had fallen into the River.
After some Time he recover'd his Strength, assuring them, that their Men
were near a River, and could not pass over it 'till so many Days,
but would, in such a Time, return all in Safety, to their Nation.
All which prov'd true at the Indians Return, which was not long after.
This Story the English-man, his Son-in-Law, affirm'd to me.

The old Man stay'd with us about two Hours, and told us we were welcome
to stay there all Night, and take what his Cabin afforded; then leaving us,
went into the Woods, to some Hunting-Quarter not far off.

{Friday.}
The next Morning early we pursu'd our Voyage, finding the Land
to improve it self in Pleasantness and Richness of Soil.
When we had gone about ten Miles, one of our Company tir'd,
being not able to travel any farther; so we went forward,
leaving the poor dejected Traveller with Tears in his Eyes,
to return to Charles-Town, and travel back again over so much bad Way,
we having pass'd thro' the worst of our Journey, the Land here
being high and dry, very few Swamps, and those dry, and a little Way through.
We travell'd about twenty Miles, lying near a Savanna
that was over-flown with Water; where we were very short of Victuals,
but finding the Woods newly burnt, and on fire in many Places,
which gave us great Hopes that Indians were not far of.

{Saturday 20 Miles.}
Next Morning very early, we waded thro' the Savanna, the Path lying there;
and about ten a Clock came to a hunting Quarter, of a great many Santees;
they made us all welcome; shewing a great deal of Joy at our coming,
giving us barbacu'd Turkeys, Bear's Oil, and Venison.

Here we hir'd Santee Jack (a good Hunter, and a well-humour'd Fellow)
to be our Pilot to the Congeree Indians; we gave him a Stroud-water-Blew,
to make his Wife an Indian Petticoat, who went with her Husband.
After two Hours Refreshment, we went on, and got that Day about twenty Miles;
we lay by a small swift Run of Water, which was pav'd at the Bottom
with a Sort of Stone much like to Tripoli, and so light,
that I fancy'd it would precipitate in no Stream, but where it naturally grew.
The Weather was very cold, the Winds holding Northerly.
We made our selves as merry as we could, having a good Supper
with the Scraps of the Venison we had given us by the Indians,
having kill'd 3 Teal and a Possum; which Medly all together
made a curious Ragoo.

{Sunday 15 Miles.}
This Day all of us had a Mind to have rested, but the Indian
was much against it, alledging, That the Place we lay at,
was not good to hunt in; telling us, if we would go on, by Noon,
he would bring us to a more convenient Place; so we mov'd forwards,
and about twelve a Clock came to the most amazing Prospect I had seen
since I had been in Carolina; we travell'd by a Swamp-side,
which Swamp I believe to be no less than twenty Miles over,
the other Side being as far as I could well discern, there appearing
great Ridges of Mountains, bearing from us W.N.W.  One Alp with a Top
like a Sugar-loaf, advanc'd its Head above all the rest very considerably;
the Day was very serene, which gave us the Advantage of seeing a long Way;
these Mountains were cloth'd all over with Trees, which seem'd to us
to be very large Timbers.

At the Sight of this fair Prospect, we stay'd all Night; our Indian
going about half an Hour before us, had provided three fat Turkeys
e'er we got up to him.

The Swamp I now spoke of, is not a miry Bog, as others generally are,
but you go down to it thro' a steep Bank, at the Foot of which,
begins this Valley, where you may go dry for perhaps 200 Yards,
then you meet with a small Brook or Run of Water, about 2 or 3 Foot deep,
then dry Land for such another Space, so another Brook, thus continuing.
The Land in this Percoarson, or Valley, being extraordinary rich,
and the Runs of Water well stor'd with Fowl.  It is the Head
of one of the Branches of Santee-River; but a farther Discovery
Time would not permit; only one Thing is very remarkable,
there growing all over this Swamp, a tall, lofty Bay-tree,
but is not the same as in England, these being in their Verdure
all the Winter long; which appears here, when you stand on the Ridge,
(where our Path lay) as if it were one pleasant, green Field,
and as even as a Bowling-green to the Eye of the Beholder;
being hemm'd in on one Side with these Ledges of vast high Mountains.

Viewing the Land here, we found an extraordinary rich, black Mould,
and some of a Copper-colour, both Sorts very good; the Land in some Places
is much burthen'd with Iron, Stone, here being great Store of it,
seemingly very good:  The eviling Springs, which are many in these Parts,
issuing out of the Rocks, which Water we drank of, it colouring
the Excrements of Travellers (by its chalybid Quality) as black as a Coal.
When we were all asleep, in the Beginning of the Night,
we were awaken'd with the dismall'st and most hideous Noise
that ever pierc'd my Ears:  This sudden Surprizal incapacitated us of guessing
what this threatning Noise might proceed from; but our Indian Pilot
(who knew these Parts very well) acquainted us, that it was customary
to hear such Musick along that Swamp-side, there being
endless Numbers of Panthers, Tygers, Wolves, and other Beasts of Prey,
which take this Swamp for their Abode in the Day, coming in whole Droves
to hunt the Deer in the Night, making this frightful Ditty 'till Day appears,
then all is still as in other Places.

{Monday.}
The next Day it prov'd a small drisly Rain, which is rare,
there happening not the tenth Part of Foggy-falling Weather
towards these Mountains, as visits those Parts.  Near the Sea-board,
the Indian kill'd 15 Turkeys this Day; there coming out of the Swamp,
(about Sun-rising) Flocks of these Fowl, containing several hundreds
in a Gang, who feed upon the Acrons, it being most Oak that grow
in these Woods.  There are but very few Pines in those Quarters.

Early the next Morning, we set forward for the Congeree-Indians,
parting with that delicious Prospect.  By the Way, our Guide kill'd
more Turkeys, and two Polcats, which he eat, esteeming them before
fat Turkeys.  Some of the Turkeys which we eat, whilst we stay'd there,
I believe, weigh'd no less than 40 Pounds.

The Land we pass'd over this Day, was most of it good, and the worst passable.
At Night we kill'd a Possum, being cloy'd with Turkeys, made a Dish of that,
which tasted much between young Pork and Veal; their Fat being as white
as any I ever saw.

Our Indian having this Day kill'd good Store of Provision with his Gun,
he always shot with a single Ball, missing but two Shoots in above forty;
they being curious Artists in managing a Gun, to make it carry either Ball,
or Shot, true.  When they have bought a Piece, and find it to shoot
any Ways crooked, they take the Barrel out of the Stock, cutting a Notch
in a Tree, wherein they set it streight, sometimes shooting away
above 100 Loads of Ammunition, before they bring the Gun to shoot
according to their Mind.  We took up our Quarters by a Fish-pond-side;
the Pits in the Woods that stand full of Water, naturally breed Fish in them,
in great Quantities.  We cook'd our Supper, but having neither Bread, or Salt,
our fat Turkeys began to be loathsome to us, altho' we were never wanting
of a good Appetite, yet a Continuance of one Diet, made us weary.

{Wednesday.}
The next Morning, Santee Jack told us, we should reach
the Indian Settlement betimes that Day; about Noon, we pass'd by
several fair Savanna's, very rich and dry; seeing great Copses of many Acres
that bore nothing but Bushes, about the Bigness of Box-trees;
which (in the Season) afford great Quantities of small Black-berries,
very pleasant Fruit, and much like to our Blues, or Huckle-berries,
that grow on Heaths in England.  Hard by the Savanna's we found the Town,
where we halted; there was not above one Man left with the Women,
the rest being gone a Hunting for a Feast.  The Women were very busily
engag'd in Gaming:  The Name or Grounds of it, I could not learn,
tho' I look'd on above two Hours.  Their Arithmetick was kept
with a Heap of Indian Grain.  When their Play was ended,
the King, or Cassetta's Wife, invited us into her Cabin.  The Indian Kings
always entertaining Travellers, either English, or Indian;
taking it as a great Affront, if they pass by their Cabins,
and take up their Quarters at any other Indian's House.
The Queen set Victuals before us, which good Compliment they use generally
as soon as you come under their Roof.

The Town consists not of above a dozen Houses, they having
other stragling Plantations up and down the Country, and are seated upon
a small Branch of Santee-River.  Their Place hath curious dry Marshes,
and Savanna's adjoining to it, and would prove an exceeding thriving Range
for Cattle, and Hogs, provided the English were seated thereon.
Besides, the Land is good for Plantations.

These Indians are a small People, having lost much of their former Numbers,
by intestine Broils; but most by the Small-pox, which hath often visited them,
sweeping away whole Towns; occasion'd by the immoderate
Government of themselves in their Sickness; as I have mention'd before,
treating of the Sewees.  Neither do I know any Savages that have traded
with the English, but what have been great Losers by this Distemper.

We found here good Store of Chinkapin-Nuts, which they gather in Winter
great Quantities of, drying them; so keep these Nuts in great Baskets
for their Use; likewise Hickerie-Nuts, which they beat betwixt
two great Stones, then sift them, so thicken their Venison-Broath therewith;
the small Shells precipitating to the Bottom of the Pot,
whilst the Kernel in Form of Flower, mixes it with the Liquor.
Both these Nuts made into Meal, makes a curious Soop, either with clear Water,
or in any Meat-Broth.

From the Nation of Indians, until such Time as you come to the Turkeiruros
in North Carolina, you will see no long Moss upon the Trees;
which Space of Ground contains above five hundred Miles.
This seeming Miracle in Nature, is occasion'd by the Highness of the Land,
it being dry and healthful; for tho' this Moss bears a Seed
in a Sort of a small Cod, yet it is generated in or near low swampy Grounds.

The Congerees are kind and affable to the English, the Queen being
very kind, giving us what Rarities her Cabin afforded, as Loblolly made
with Indian Corn, and dry'd Peaches.  These Congerees have
abundance of Storks and Cranes in their Savannas.  They take them
before they can fly, and breed 'em as tame and familiar
as a Dung-hill Fowl.  They had a tame Crane at one of these Cabins,
that was scarce less than six Foot in Height, his Head being round,
with a shining natural Crimson Hue, which they all have.
These are a very comely Sort of Indians, there being
a strange Difference in the Proportion and Beauty of these Heathens.
Altho' their Tribes or Nations border one upon another, yet you may discern
as great an Alteration in their Features and Dispositions,
as you can in their Speech, which generally proves quite different
from each other, though their Nations be not above 10 or 20 Miles in Distance.
The Women here being as handsome as most I have met withal,
being several fine-finger'd Brounetto's amongst them.  These Lasses
stick not upon Hand long, for they marry when very young,
as at 12 or 14 Years of Age.  The English Traders are seldom without
an Indian Female for his Bed-fellow, alledging these Reasons
as sufficient to allow of such a Familiarity.  First, They being remote
from any white People, that it preserves their Friendship with the Heathens,
they esteeming a white Man's Child much above one of their getting,
the Indian Mistress ever securing her white Friend Provisions whilst
he stays amongst them.  And lastly, This Correspondence makes them learn
the Indian Tongue much the sooner, they being of the French-man's Opinion,
how that an English Wife teaches her Husband more English in one Night,
than a School-master can in a Week.

We saw at the Cassetta's Cabin the strangest Spectacle of Antiquity
I ever knew, it being an old Indian Squah, that, had I been to have guess'd
at her Age by her Aspect, old Parr's Head (the Welch Methusalem)
was a Face in Swadling-Clouts to hers.  Her Skin hung in Reaves
like a Bag of Tripe.  By a fair Computation, one might have justly thought
it would have contain'd three such Carcasses as hers then was.
She had one of her Hands contracted by some Accident in the Fire,
they sleeping always by it, and often fall into sad Disasters,
especially in their drunken Moods.  I made the strictest Enquiry
that was possible, and by what I could gather, she was considerably above
100 Years old, notwithstanding she smoak'd Tobacco, and eat her Victuals,
to all Appearance, as heartily as one of 18.  One of our Company
spoke some of their Language, and having not quite forgotten
his former Intrigues with the Indian Lasses, would fain have been dealing
with some of the young Female Fry; but they refus'd him,
he having nothing that these Girls esteem'd.  At Night we were laid
in the King's Cabin, where the Queen and the old Squah pig'd in with us:
The former was very much disfigur'd with Tettars, and very reserv'd,
which disappointed our fellow Traveller in his Intrigues.

The Women smoak much Tobacco, (as most Indians do.)  They have Pipes,
whose Heads are cut out of Stone, and will hold an Ounce of Tobacco,
and some much less.  They have large wooden Spoons, as big as small Ladles,
which they make little Use of, lading the Meat out of the Bowls
with their Fingers.

{Thursday.}
In the Morning we rose before Day, having hir'd a Guide over Night
to conduct us on our Way; but it was too soon for him to stir out,
the Indians never setting forward 'till the Sun is an Hour or two high,
and hath exhall'd the Dew from the Earth.  The Queen got us a good Breakfast
before we left her; she had a young Child, which was much afflicted
with the Cholick; for which Distemper she infus'd a Root in Water,
which was held in a Goard; this she took into her Mouth,
and spurted it into the Infant's, which gave it ease.  After we had eaten,
we set out (with our new Guide) for the Wateree Indians.
We went over a great deal of indifferent Land this Day.  Here begins to appear
very good Marble, which continues more and less for the Space of 500 Miles.
We lay all Night by a Run of Water, as we always do, (if possible)
for the Convenience of it.  The Weather was very cold.  We went this Day
about 30 Miles from the Congerees.

{Friday.}
In the Morning we made no Stay to get our Breakfast, but hasted on our Voyage,
the Land increasing in Marble and Richness of Soil.  At Noon we halted,
getting our Dinner upon a Marble-Stone, that rose it self
half a Foot above the Surface of the Earth, and might contain
the Compass of a Quarter of an Acre of Land, being very even,
there growing upon it in some Places a small red Berry, like a Salmon-Spawn,
there boiling out of the main Rock curious Springs of as delicious Water,
as ever I drank in any Parts I ever travell'd in.

These Parts likewise affords good free Stone, fit for Building,
and of several Sorts.  The Land here is pleasantly seated,
with pretty little Hills and Valleys, the rising Sun at once shewing
his glorious reflecting Rays on a great many of these little Mountains.
We went this Day about 20 Miles, our Guide walking like a Horse, 'till we had
sadl'd him with a good heavy Pack of some Part of our Cloaths and Bedding,
by which Means we kept Pace with him.

This Night we lay by a Run-side, where I found a fine yellow Earth,
the same with Bruxels-Sand, which Goldsmiths use to cast withal,
giving a good Price in England, and other Parts.  Here is likewise
the true Blood-Stone, and considerable Quantities of Fullers-Earth,
which I took a Proof of, by scouring great Spots out of Woollen,
and it prov'd very good.

{Saturday.}
As we were on our Road this Morning, our Indian shot at a Tyger,
that cross'd the Way, he being a great Distance from us.
I believe he did him no Harm, because he sat on his Breech afterwards,
and look'd upon us.  I suppose he expected to have had a Spaniel Bitch,
that I had with me, for his Breakfast, who run towards him,
but in the Midway stopt her Career, and came sneaking back to us
with her Tail betwixt her Legs.

We saw in the Path a great many Trees blown up by the Roots,
at the Bottom whereof stuck great Quantities of fine red Bole;
I believe nothing inferior to that of Venice or Lemma.
We found some Holes in the Earth, which were full of a Water as black as Ink.
I thought that Tincture might proceed from some Mineral,
but had not Time to make a farther Discovery.  About Noon we pass'd over
a pleasant stony Brook, whose Water was of a bluish Cast,
as it is for several hundreds of Miles towards the Heads of the Rivers,
I suppose occasion'd by the vast Quantities of Marble
lying in the Bowels of the Earth.  The Springs that feed
these Rivulets, lick up some Potions of the Stones in the Brooks;
which Dissolution gives this Tincture, as appears in all,
or most of the Rivers and Brooks of this Country, whose rapid Streams
are like those in Yorkshire, and other Northern Counties of England.
The Indians talk of many Sorts of Fish which they afford,
but we had not Time to discover their Species.

I saw here had been some Indian Plantations formerly,
there being several pleasant Fields of clear'd Ground, and excellent Soil,
now well spread with fine bladed Grass, and Strawberry-Vines.

The Mould here is excessive rich, and a Country very pleasing to the Eye,
had it the Convenience of a navigable River, as all new Colonies
(of Necessity) require.  It would make a delightful Settlement.

We went eight Miles farther, and came to the Wateree Chickanee Indians.
The Land holds good, there being not a Spot of bad Land to be seen
in several Days going.

The People of this Nation are likely tall Persons, and great Pilferers,
stealing from us any Thing they could lay their Hands on,
though very respectful in giving us what Victuals we wanted.
We lay in their Cabins all Night, being dark smoaky Holes,
as ever I saw any Indians dwell in.  This Nation is much more populous
than the Congerees, and their Neighbours, yet understand not
one anothers Speech.  They are very poor in English Effects,
several of them having no Guns, making Use of Bows and Arrows,
being a lazy idle People, a Quality incident to most Indians,
but none to that Degree as these, as I ever met withal.

Their Country is wholly free from Swamps and Quagmires, being high dry Land,
and consequently healthful, producing large Corn-Stalks, and fair Grain.

{Sunday.}
Next Morning, we took off our Beards with a Razor, the Indians looking on
with a great deal of Admiration.  They told us, they had never seen
the like before, and that our Knives cut far better than those
that came amongst the Indians.  They would fain have borrow'd our Razors,
as they had our Knives, Scissors, and Tobacco-Tongs, the day before,
being as ingenious at picking of Pockets, as any, I believe,
the World affords; for they will steal with their Feet.
Yesterday, one of our Company, not walking so fast as the rest,
was left behind.  He being out of Sight before we miss'd him,
and not coming up to us, tho' we staid a considerable time on the Road
for him, we stuck up Sticks in the Ground, and left other Tokens
to direct him which way we were gone:  But he came not to us that Night,
which gave us Occasion to fear some of the Heathens had kill'd him,
for his Cloaths, or the savage Beasts had devour'd him in the Wilderness,
he having nothing about him to strike Fire withal.  As we were debating
which way we should send to know what was become of him, he overtook us,
having a Waxsaw Indian for his Guide.  He told us, he had miss'd the Path,
and got to another Nation of Indians, but 3 Miles off, who at that time
held great Feasting.  They had entertain'd him very respectfully,
and sent that Indian to invite us amongst them, wondring that
we would not take up our Quarters with them, but make our Abode
with such a poor Sort of Indians, that were not capable of entertaining us
according to our Deserts:  We receiv'd the Messenger with
a great many Ceremonies, acceptable to those sort of Creatures.
Bidding our Waterree King adieu, we set forth towards the Waxsaws,
going along clear'd Ground all the Way.  Upon our Arrival, we were led into
a very large and lightsome Cabin, the like I have not met withal.
They laid Furs and Deer-Skins upon Cane Benches for us to sit or lie upon,
bringing (immediately) stewed Peaches and green Corn, that is preserv'd
in their Cabins before it is ripe, and sodden and boil'd when they use it,
which is a pretty sort of Food, and a great Increaser of the Blood.

These Indians are of an extraordinary Stature, and call'd
by their Neighbours flat Heads, which seems a very suitable Name for them.
In their Infancy, their Nurses lay the Back-part of their Children's Heads
on a Bag of Sand, (such as Engravers use to rest their Plates upon.)
They use a Roll, which is placed upon the Babe's Forehead,
it being laid with its Back on a flat Board, and swaddled hard down thereon,
from one End of this Engine, to the other.  This Method makes
the Child's Body and Limbs as straight as an Arrow.  There being
some young Indians that are perhaps crookedly inclin'd,
at their first coming into the World, who are made perfectly straight
by this Method.  I never saw an Indian of a mature Age,
that was any ways crooked, except by Accident, and that way seldom,
for they cure and prevent Deformities of the Limbs, and Body, very exactly.
The Instrument I spoke of before, being a sort of a Press, that is
let out and in, more or less, according to the Discretion of the Nurse,
in which they make the Child's Head flat, it makes the Eyes stand
a prodigious Way asunder, and the Hair hang over the Forehead
like the Eves of a House, which seems very frightful:  They being ask'd
the Reason why they practis'd this Method, reply'd, the Indian's Sight
was much strengthened and quicker, thereby, to discern the Game in hunting
at larger Distance, and so never miss'd of becoming expert Hunters,
the Perfection of which they all aim at, as we do to become
experienced Soldiers, learned School-Men, or Artists in Mechanicks:
He that is a good Hunter never misses of being a Favourite amongst the Women;
the prettiest Girls being always bestow'd upon the chiefest Sports-Men,
and those of a grosser Mould, upon the useless Lubbers.
Thus they have a Graduation amongst them, as well as other Nations.
As for the Solemnity of Marriages amongst them, kept with so much Ceremony
as divers Authors affirm, it never appear'd amongst those many Nations
I have been withal, any otherwise than in the Manner I have
mention'd hereafter.

The Girls at 12 or 13 Years of Age, as soon as Nature prompts them,
freely bestow their Maidenheads on some Youth about the same Age,
continuing her Favours on whom she most affects, changing her Mate very often,
few or none of them being constant to one, till a greater Number of Years
has made her capable of managing domestick Affairs, and she hath try'd
the Vigour of most of the Nation she belongs to; Multiplicity of Gallants
never being a Stain to a Female's Reputation, or the least Hindrance
of her Advancement, but the more Whorish, the more Honourable,
and they of all most coveted, by those of the first Rank, to make a Wife of.
The `Flos Virginis', so much coveted by the Europeans, is never valued
by these Savages.  When a Man and Woman have gone through their Degrees,
(there being a certain Graduation amongst them) and are allow'd
to be House-Keepers, which is not till they arrive at such an Age,
and have past the Ceremonies practis'd by their Nation, almost all Kingdoms
differing in the Progress thereof, then it is that the Man makes his Addresses
to some one of these thorough-paced Girls, or other, whom he likes best.
When she is won, the Parents of both Parties, (with Advice of the King)
agree about the Matter, making a Promise of their Daughter, to the Man,
that requires her, it often happening that they converse and travel together,
for several Moons before the Marriage is publish'd openly; After this,
at the least Dislike the Man may turn her away, and take another;
or if she disapproves of his Company, a Price is set upon her,
and if the Man that seeks to get her, will pay the Fine to her Husband,
she becomes free from Him:  Likewise some of their War Captains,
and great Men, very often will retain 3 or 4 Girls at a time
for their own Use, when at the same time, he is so impotent and old,
as to be incapable of making Use of one of them; so that
he seldom misses of wearing greater Horns than the Game he kills.
The Husband is never so enrag'd as to put his Adulteress to Death; if she
is caught in the Fact, the Rival becomes Debtor to the cornuted Husband,
in a certain Quantity of Trifles valuable amongst them, which he pays
as soon as discharg'd, and then all Animosity is laid aside betwixt
the Husband, and his Wife's Gallant.  The Man proves often so good humour'd
as to please his Neighbour and gratify his Wife's Inclinations,
by letting her out for a Night or two, to the Embraces of some other,
which perhaps she has a greater Liking to, tho' this is
not commonly practis'd.

They set apart the youngest and prettiest Faces for trading Girls;
these are remarkable by their Hair, having a particular Tonsure
by which they are known, and distinguish'd from those engag'd to Husbands.
They are mercenary, and whoever makes Use of them, first hires them,
the greatest Share of the Gain going to the King's Purse,
who is the chief Bawd, exercising his Perogative over all
the Stews of his Nation, and his own Cabin (very often)
being the chiefest Brothel-House.  As they grow in Years,
the hot Assaults of Love grow cooler; and then they commonly are so staid,
as to engage themselves with more Constancy to each other.
I have seen several Couples amongst them, that have been so reserv'd,
as to live together for many Years, faithful to each other,
admitting none to their Beds but such as they own'd for their Wife or Husband:
So continuing to their Life's end.

At our Waxsaw Landlord's Cabin, was a Woman employ'd in no other Business
than Cookery; it being a House of great Resort.  The Fire was surrounded
with Roast-meat, or Barbakues, and the Pots continually boiling
full of Meat, from Morning till Night.  This She-Cook was the cleanliest
I ever saw amongst the Heathens of America, washing her Hands
before she undertook to do any Cookery; and repeated this unusual Decency
very often in a day.  She made us as White-Bread as any English
could have done, and was full as neat, and expeditious, in her Affairs.
It happen'd to be one of their great Feasts, when we were there:
The first day that we came amongst them, arriv'd an Ambassador
from the King of Sapona, to treat with these Indians about
some important Affairs.  He was painted with Vermillion all over his Face,
having a very large Cutlass stuck in his Girdle, and a Fusee in his Hand.
At Night, the Revels began where this Foreign Indian was admitted;
the King, and War Captain, inviting us to see their Masquerade:
This Feast was held in Commemoration of the plentiful Harvest of Corn
they had reap'd the Summer before, with an united Supplication
for the like plentiful Produce the Year ensuing.  These Revels
are carried on in a House made for that purpose, it being done round
with white Benches of fine Canes, joining along the Wall;
and a place for the Door being left, which is so low, that a Man
must stoop very much to enter therein.  This Edifice resembles
a large Hay-Rick; its Top being Pyramidal, and much bigger
than their other Dwellings, and at the Building whereof, every one assists
till it is finish'd.  All their Dwelling-Houses are cover'd with Bark,
but this differs very much; for, it is very artificially
thatch'd with Sedge and Rushes:  As soon as finish'd, they place
some one of their chiefest Men to dwell therein, charging him
with the diligent Preservation thereof, as a Prince commits
the Charge and Government of a Fort or Castle, to some Subject
he thinks worthy of that Trust.  In these State-Houses is transacted
all Publick and Private Business, relating to the Affairs of the Government,
as the Audience of Foreign Ambassadors from other Indian Rulers,
Consultation of waging and making War, Proposals of their Trade
with neighbouring Indians, or the English, who happen to come
amongst them.  In this Theater, the most Aged and Wisest meet,
determining what to Act, and what may be most convenient to Omit,
Old Age being held in as great Veneration amongst these Heathens,
as amongst any People you shall meet withal in any Part of the World.

Whensoever an Aged Man is speaking, none ever interrupts him,
(the contrary Practice the English, and other Europeans, too much use)
the Company yielding a great deal of Attention to his Tale,
with a continued Silence, and an exact Demeanour, during the Oration.
Indeed, the Indians are a People that never interrupt one another
in their Discourse; no Man so much as offering to open his Mouth,
till the Speaker has utter'd his Intent:  When an English-Man
comes amongst them, perhaps every one is acquainted with him,
yet, first, the King bids him Welcome, after him the War-Captain,
so on gradually from High to Low; not one of all these speaking
to the White Guest, till his Superiour has ended his Salutation.
Amongst Women, it seems impossible to find a Scold; if they are provok'd,
or affronted, by their Husbands, or some other, they resent
the Indignity offer'd them in silent Tears, or by refusing their Meat.
Would some of our European Daughters of Thunder set these Indians
for a Pattern, there might be more quiet Families found amongst them,
occasion'd by that unruly Member, the Tongue.

Festination proceeds from the Devil, (says a Learned Doctor)
a Passion the Indians seem wholly free from; they determining
no Business of Moment, without a great deal of Deliberation and Wariness.
None of their Affairs appear to be attended with Impetuosity, or Haste,
being more content with the common Accidents incident to humane Nature,
(as Losses, contrary Winds, bad Weather, and Poverty)
than those of more civilized Countries.

Now, to return to our State-House, whither we were invited by the Grandees:
As soon as we came into it, they plac'd our Englishmen near the King;
it being my Fortune to sit next him, having his great General,
or War-Captain, on my other Hand.  The House is as dark as a Dungeon,
and as hot as one of the Dutch-Stoves in Holland.  They had made
a circular Fire of split Canes in the middle of the House.
It was one Man's Employment to add more split Reeds to the one end
as it consum'd at the other, there being a small Vacancy left
to supply it with Fewel.  They brought in great store of Loblolly,
and other Medleys, made of Indian Grain, stewed Peaches,
Bear-Venison, &c. every one bringing some Offering to enlarge the Banquet,
according to his Degree and Quality.  When all the Viands were brought in,
the first Figure began with kicking out the Dogs, which are seemingly Wolves,
made tame with starving and beating; they being the worst Dog-Masters
in the World; so that it is an infallible Cure for Sore-Eyes,
ever to see an Indian's Dog fat.  They are of a quite contrary Disposition
to Horses; some of their Kings having gotten, by great chance,
a Jade, stolen by some neighbouring Indian, and transported
farther into the Country, and sold; or bought sometimes of a Christian,
that trades amongst them.  These Creatures they continually cram,
and feed with Maiz, and what the Horse will eat, till he is as fat as a Hog;
never making any farther use of him than to fetch a Deer home,
that is killed somewhere near the Indian's Plantation.

After the Dogs had fled the Room, the Company was summon'd by Beat of Drum;
the Musick being made of a dress'd Deer's Skin, tied hard upon
an Earthen Porridge-Pot.  Presently in came fine Men dress'd up with Feathers,
their Faces being covered with Vizards made of Gourds;
round their Ancles and Knees, were hung Bells of several sorts,
having Wooden Falchions in their Hands, (such as Stage-Fencers commonly use;)
in this Dress they danced about an Hour, shewing many strange Gestures,
and brandishing their Wooden Weapons, as if they were going
to fight each other; oftentimes walking very nimbly round the Room,
without making the least Noise with their Bells, (a thing I much admired at;)
again, turning their Bodies, Arms and Legs, into such frightful Postures,
that you would have guess'd they had been quite raving mad:  At last,
they cut two or three high Capers, and left the Room.  In their stead,
came in a parcel of Women and Girls, to the Number of Thirty odd;
every one taking place according to her Degree of Stature,
the tallest leading the Dance, and the least of all being plac'd last;
with these they made a circular Dance, like a Ring,
representing the Shape of the Fire they danced about:  Many of these
had great Horse-Bells about their Legs, and small Hawk's Bells
about their Necks.  They had Musicians, who were two Old Men,
one of whom beat a Drum, while the other rattled with a Gourd,
that had Corn in it, to make a Noise withal:  To these Instruments,
they both sung a mournful Ditty; the Burthen of their Song was,
in Remembrance of their former Greatness, and Numbers of their Nation,
the famous Exploits of their Renowned Ancestors, and all Actions of Moment
that had (in former Days) been perform'd by their Forefathers.
At these Festivals it is, that they give a Traditional Relation of what
hath pass'd amongst them, to the younger Fry.  These verbal Deliveries
being always publish'd in their most Publick Assemblies,
serve instead of our Traditional Notes, by the use of Letters.
Some Indians, that I have met withal, have given me
a very curious Description of the great Deluge, the Immortality of the Soul,
with a pithy Account of the Reward of good and wicked Deeds in the Life
to come; having found, amongst some of them, great Observers of Moral Rules,
and the Law of Nature; indeed, a worthy Foundation to build Christianity upon,
were a true Method found out, and practis'd, for the Performance thereof.

Their way of Dancing, is nothing but a sort of stamping Motion,
much like the treading upon Founders Bellows.  This Female-Gang
held their Dance for above six Hours, being all of them of a white Lather,
like a Running Horse that has just come in from his Race.
My Landlady was the Ring-leader of the Amazons, who, when in her own House,
behav'd herself very discreetly, and warily, in her Domestick Affairs;
yet, Custom had so infatuated her, as to almost break her Heart
with Dancing amongst such a confused Rabble.  During this Dancing,
the Spectators do not neglect their Business, in working the Loblolly-Pots,
and the other Meat that was brought thither; more or less of them
being continually Eating, whilst the others were Dancing.
When the Dancing was ended, every Youth that was so disposed,
catch'd hold of the Girl he liked best, and took her that Night
for his Bed-Fellow, making as short Courtship and expeditious Weddings,
as the Foot-Guards us'd to do with the Trulls in Salisbury-Court.

Next we shall treat of the Land hereabouts, which is a Marl as red as Blood,
and will lather like Soap.  The Town stands on this Land,
which holds considerably farther in the Country, and is in my Opinion,
so durable that no Labour of Man, in one or two Ages, could make it poor.
I have formerly seen the like in Leicestershire, bordering upon Rutland.
Here were Corn-Stalks in their Fields as thick as the Small of a Man's Leg,
and they are ordinarily to be seen.

We lay with these Indians one Night, there being by my Bed-side
one of the largest Iron Pots I had ever seen in America,
which I much wondred at, because I thought there might be no navigable Stream
near that Place.  I ask'd them, where they got that Pot?
They laugh'd at my Demand, and would give me no Answer, which makes me guess
it came from some Wreck, and that we were nearer the Ocean,
or some great River, than I thought.

{Monday.}
The next day about Noon, we accidentally met with a Southward Indian,
amongst those that us'd to trade backwards and forwards,
and spoke a little English, whom we hir'd to go with us
to the Esaw Indians, a very large Nation containing many thousand People.
In the Afternoon we set forward, taking our Leaves of the Wisack Indians,
and leaving them some Trifles.  On our Way, we met with
several Towns of Indians, each Town having its Theater or State House,
such Houses being found all along the Road, till you come to Sapona,
and then no more of those Buildings, it being about 170 Miles.
We reach'd 10 Miles this day, lying at another Town of the Wisacks.
The Man of the House offer'd us Skins to sell, but they were too heavy Burdens
for our long Voyage.

{Tuesday.}
Next Morning we set out early, breaking the Ice we met withal,
in the stony Runs, which were many.  We pass'd by several Cottages,
and about 8 of the Clock came to a pretty big Town,
where we took up our Quarters, in one of their State Houses,
the Men being all out, hunting in the Woods, and none but Women at home.
Our Fellow Traveller of whom I spoke before at the Congerees,
having a great Mind for an Indian Lass, for his Bed-Fellow that Night,
spoke to our Guide, who soon got a Couple, reserving one for himself.
That which fell to our Companion's Share, was a pretty young Girl.
Tho' they could not understand one Word of what each other spoke,
yet the Female Indian, being no Novice at her Game, but understanding
what she came thither for, acted her Part dexterously enough with her Cully,
to make him sensible of what she wanted; which was to pay the Hire,
before he rode the Hackney.  He shew'd her all the Treasure
he was possess'd of, as Beads, Red Cadis, &c. which she lik'd very well,
and permitted him to put them into his Pocket again, endearing him
with all the Charms, which one of a better Education than Dame Nature
had bestow'd upon her, could have made use of, to render her Consort
a surer Captive.  After they had us'd this Sort of Courtship a small time,
the Match was confirm'd by both Parties, with the Approbation
of as many Indian Women, as came to the House, to celebrate
our Winchester-Wedding.  Every one of the Bride-Maids were as great Whores,
as Mrs. Bride, tho' not quite so handsome.  Our happy Couple
went to Bed together before us all, and with as little Blushing,
as if they had been Man and Wife for 7 Years.  The rest of the Company
being weary with travelling, had more Mind to take their Rest,
than add more Weddings to that hopeful one already consummated;
so that tho' the other Virgins offer'd their Service to us,
we gave them their Answer, and went to sleep.  About an Hour before day,
I awak'd, and saw somebody walking up and down the Room
in a seemingly deep Melancholy.  I call'd out to know who it was,
and it prov'd to be Mr. Bridegroom, who in less than 12 Hours, was Batchelor,
Husband, and Widdower, his dear Spouse having pick'd his Pocket of the Beads,
Cadis, and what else should have gratified the Indians
for the Victuals we receiv'd of them.  However that did not serve her turn,
but she had also got his Shooes away, which he had made the Night before,
of a drest Buck-Skin.  Thus dearly did our Spark already repent
his new Bargain, walking bare-foot, in his Penitentials,
like some poor Pilgrim to Loretto.

After the Indians had laugh'd their Sides sore at the Figure
Mr. Bridegroom made, with much ado, we muster'd up another Pair of Shooes,
or Moggisons, and set forward on our intended Voyage,
the Company (all the way) lifting up their Prayers for the new married Couple,
whose Wedding had made away with that, which should have purchas'd our Food.

{Wednesday.}
Relying wholly on Providence, we march'd on, now and then paying our Respects
to the new-married Man.  The Land held rich and good;
in many Places there were great Quantities of Marble.
The Water was still of a wheyish Colour.  About 10 of the Clock,
we waded thro' a River, (about the Bigness of Derwent, in Yorkshire)
which I take to be one of the Branches of Winjaw River.
We saw several Flocks of Pigeons, Field-Fares, and Thrushes,
much like those of Europe.  The Indians of these Parts
use Sweating very much.  If any Pain seize their Limbs, or Body,
immediately they take Reeds, or small Wands, and bend them Umbrella-Fashion,
covering them with Skins and Matchcoats:  They have a large Fire not far off,
wherein they heat Stones, or (where they are wanting) Bark,
putting it into this Stove, which casts an extraordinary Heat:
There is a Pot of Water in the Bagnio, in which is put a Bunch of an Herb,
bearing a Silver Tassel, not much unlike the Aurea Virga.
With this Vegetable they rub the Head, Temples, and other Parts,
which is reckon'd a Preserver of the Sight and Strengthener of the Brain.
We went, this day, about 12 Miles, one of our Company being
lame of his Knee.  We pass'd over an exceeding rich Tract of Land,
affording Plenty of great free Stones, and marble Rocks,
and abounding in many pleasant and delightsome Rivulets.
At Noon, we stay'd and refresh'd ourselves at a Cabin,
where we met with one of their War-Captains, a Man of great Esteem among them.
At his Departure from the Cabin, the Man of the House
scratch'd this War-Captain on the Shoulder, which is look'd upon
as a very great Compliment among them.  The Captain went two or three Miles
on our way, with us, to direct us in our Path.  One of our Company
gave him a Belt, which he took very kindly, bidding us call at his House,
(which was in our Road) and stay till the lame Traveller was well,
and speaking to the Indian, to order his Servant to make us welcome.
Thus we parted, he being on his Journey to the Congerees,
and Savannas, a famous, warlike, friendly Nation of Indians,
living to the South-End of Ashly River.  He had a Man-Slave with him,
who was loaded with European Goods, his Wife and Daughter being in Company.
He told us, at his Departure, that James had sent Knots
to all the Indians thereabouts, for every Town to send in 10 Skins,
meaning Captain Moor, then Governour of South-Carolina.
The Towns being very thick hereabouts, at Night we took up our Quarters
at one of the chief Mens Houses, which was one of the Theaters
I spoke of before.  There ran, hard-by this Town, a pleasant River,
not very large, but, as the Indians told us, well stor'd with Fish.
We being now among the powerful Nation of Esaws, our Landlord entertain'd us
very courteously, shewing us, that Night, a pair of Leather-Gloves,
which he had made; and comparing them with ours, they prov'd to be
very ingeniously done, considering it was the first Tryal.

{Thursday.}
In the Morning, he desired to see the lame Man's affected Part,
to the end he might do something, which (he believ'd) would give him Ease.
After he had viewed it accordingly, he pull'd out an Instrument,
somewhat like a Comb, which was made of a split Reed,
with 15 Teeth of Rattle-Snakes set at much the same distance,
as in a large Horn-Comb:  With these he scratch'd the place
where the Lameness chiefly lay, till the Blood came, bathing it,
both before and after Incision, with warm Water, spurted out of his Mouth.
This done, he ran into his Plantation, and got some Sassafras Root,
(which grows here in great plenty) dry'd it in the Embers,
scrap'd off the outward Rind, and having beat it betwixt two Stones,
apply'd it to the Part afflicted, binding it up well.  Thus, in a day or two,
the Patient became sound.  This day, we pass'd through a great many Towns,
and Settlements, that belong to the Sugeree-Indians, no barren Land
being found amongst them, but great plenty of Free-Stone, and good Timber.
About three in the Afternoon, we reach'd the Kadapau King's House,
where we met with one John Stewart, a Scot, then an Inhabitant
of James-River in Virginia, who had traded there for many Years.
Being alone, and hearing that the Sinnagers (Indians from Canada)
were abroad in that Country, he durst not venture homewards,
till he saw us, having heard that we were coming, above 20 days before.
It is very odd, that News should fly so swiftly among these People.
Mr. Stewart had left Virginia ever since the October before,
and had lost a day of the Week, of which we inform'd him.  He had brought
seven Horses along with him, loaded with English Goods for the Indians;
and having sold most of his Cargo, told us, if we would stay two Nights,
he would go along with us.  Company being very acceptable,
we accepted the Proposal.

{Friday.}
The next day, we were preparing for our Voyage, and baked some Bread
to take along with us.  Our Landlord was King of the Kadapau Indians,
and always kept two or three trading Girls in his Cabin.
Offering one of these to some of our Company, who refus'd his Kindness,
his Majesty flew into a violent Passion, to be thus slighted,
telling the Englishmen, they were good for nothing.  Our old Gamester,
particularly, hung his Ears at the Proposal, having too lately been a Loser
by that sort of Merchandize.  It was observable, that we did not see
one Partridge from the Waterrees to this place, tho' my Spaniel-Bitch,
which I had with me in this Voyage, had put up a great many before.

{Saturday.}
On Saturday Morning, we all set out for Sapona, killing, in these Creeks,
several Ducks of a strange Kind, having a red Circle about their Eyes,
like some Pigeons that I have seen, a Top-knot reaching
from the Crown of their Heads, almost to the middle of their Backs,
and abundance of Feathers of pretty Shades and Colours.
They prov'd excellent Meat.  Likewise, here is good store of Woodcocks,
not so big as those in England, the Feathers of the Breast
being of a Carnation-Colour, exceeding ours for Delicacy of Food.
The Marble here is of different Colours, some or other of the Rocks
representing most Mixtures, but chiefly the white having black and blue Veins
in it, and some that are red.  This day, we met with seven heaps of Stones,
being the Monuments of seven Indians, that were slain in that place
by the Sinnagers, or Iroquois.  Our Indian Guide added a Stone
to each heap.  We took up our Lodgings near a Brook-side,
where the Virginia Man's Horses got away; and went back to the Kadapau's.

{Sunday.}
This day, one of our Company, with a Sapona Indian, who attended Stewart,
went back for the Horses.  In the mean time, we went to shoot Pigeons,
which were so numerous in these Parts, that you might see many Millions
in a Flock; they sometimes split off the Limbs of stout Oaks, and other Trees,
upon which they roost o' Nights.  You may find several Indian Towns,
of not above 17 Houses, that have more than 100 Gallons of Pigeons Oil,
or Fat; they using it with Pulse, or Bread, as we do Butter,
and making the Ground as white as a Sheet with their Dung.
The Indians take a Light, and go among them in the Night,
and bring away some thousands, killing them with long Poles,
as they roost in the Trees.  At this time of the Year, the Flocks,
as they pass by, in great measure, obstruct the Light of the day.

{Monday.}
On Monday, we went about 25 Miles, travelling through a pleasant,
dry Country, and took up our Lodgings by a Hillside, that was one entire Rock,
out of which gush'd out pleasant Fountains of well-tasted Water.

{Tuesday.}
The next day, still passing along such Land as we had done
for many days before, which was, Hills and Vallies, about 10 a Clock
we reach'd the Top of one of these Mountains, which yielded us
a fine Prospect of a very level Country, holding so, on all sides,
farther than we could discern.  When we came to travel through it,
we found it very stiff and rich, being a sort of Marl.
This Valley afforded as large Timber as any I ever met withal,
especially of Chesnut-Oaks, which render it an excellent Country
for raising great Herds of Swine.  Indeed, were it cultivated,
we might have good hopes of as pleasant and fertile a Valley,
as any our English in America can afford.  At Night, we lay by
a swift Current, where we saw plenty of Turkies, but pearch'd upon
such lofty Oaks, that our Guns would not kill them, tho' we shot very often,
and our Guns were very good.  Some of our Company shot several times,
at one Turkey, before he would fly away, the Pieces being loaded
with large Goose-shot.

{Wednesday.}
Next Morning, we got our Breakfasts; roasted Acorns being one of the Dishes.
The Indians beat them into Meal, and thicken their Venison-Broth with them;
and oftentimes make a palatable Soop.  They are used instead of Bread,
boiling them till the Oil swims on the top of the Water,
which they preserve for use, eating the Acorns with Flesh-meat.
We travell'd, this day, about 25 Miles, over pleasant Savanna Ground,
high, and dry, having very few Trees upon it, and those standing
at a great distance.  The Land was very good, and free from
Grubs or Underwood.  A Man near Sapona may more easily clear
10 Acres of Ground, than in some places he can one; there being
much loose Stone upon the Land, lying very convenient for making of dry Walls,
or any other sort of durable Fence.  This Country abounds likewise
with curious bold Creeks, (navigable for small Craft) disgorging themselves
into the main Rivers, that vent themselves into the Ocean.
These Creeks are well stor'd with sundry sorts of Fish, and Fowl,
and are very convenient for the Transportation of what Commodities
this Place may produce.  This Night, we had a great deal of Rain,
with Thunder and Lightning.

{Thursday.}
Next Morning, it proving delicate Weather, three of us separated ourselves
from the Horses, and the rest of the Company, and went directly
for Sapona Town.  That day, we pass'd through a delicious Country,
(none that I ever saw exceeds it.)  We saw fine bladed Grass, six Foot high,
along the Banks of these pleasant Rivulets:  We pass'd by
the Sepulchres of several slain Indians.  Coming, that day, about 30 Miles,
we reach'd the fertile and pleasant Banks of Sapona River,
whereon stands the Indian Town and Fort.  Nor could all Europe
afford a pleasanter Stream, were it inhabited by Christians,
and cultivated by ingenious Hands.  These Indians live
in a clear Field, about a Mile square, which they would have sold me,
because I talked sometimes of coming into those Parts to live.
This most pleasant River may be something broader than the Thames
at Kingston, keeping a continual pleasant warbling Noise,
with its reverberating on the bright Marble Rocks.  It is beautified
with a numerous Train of Swans, and other sorts of Water-Fowl,
not common, though extraordinary pleasing to the Eye.  The forward Spring
welcom'd us with her innumerable Train of small Choristers,
which inhabit those fair Banks; the Hills redoubling, and adding Sweetness
to their melodious Tunes by their shrill Echoes.  One side of the River
is hemm'd in with mountainy Ground, the other side proving as rich a Soil
to the Eye of a knowing Person with us, as any this Western World can afford.
We took up our Quarters at the King's Cabin, who was a good Friend
to the English, and had lost one of his Eyes in their Vindication.
Being upon his march towards the Appallatche Mountains,
amongst a Nation of Indians in their Way, there happen'd a Difference,
while they were measuring of Gunpowder; and the Powder, by accident,
taking fire, blew out one of this King's Eyes, and did a great deal
more mischief, upon the spot:  Yet this Sapona King stood firmly
to the English Man's Interest, with whom he was in Company,
still siding with him against the Indians.  They were intended for
the South Sea, but were too much fatigued by the vast Ridge of Mountains,
tho' they hit the right Passage; it being no less than five days Journey
through a Ledge of Rocky Hills, and sandy Desarts.  And which is yet worse,
there is no Water, nor scarce a Bird to be seen, during your Passage
over these barren Crags and Valleys.  The Sapona River proves to be
the West Branch of Cape-Fair, or Clarendon River, whose Inlet,
with other Advantages, makes it appear as noble a River to plant a Colony in,
as any I have met withal.

The Saponas had (about 10 days before we came thither) taken
Five Prisoners of the Sinnagers or Jennitos, a Sort of People that range
several thousands of Miles, making all Prey they lay their Hands on.
These are fear'd by all the savage Nations I ever was among,
the Westward Indians dreading their Approach.  They are all forted in,
and keep continual Spies and Out-Guards for their better Security.
Those Captives they did intend to burn, few Prisoners of War
escaping that Punishment.  The Fire of Pitch-Pine being got ready,
and a Feast appointed, which is solemnly kept at the time of their acting
this Tragedy, the Sufferer has his Body stuck thick with Light-Wood-Splinters,
which are lighted like so many Candles, the tortur'd Person dancing round
a great Fire, till his Strength fails, and disables him from making them
any farther Pastime.  Most commonly, these Wretches behave themselves
(in the Midst of their Tortures) with a great deal of Bravery and Resolution,
esteeming it Satisfaction enough, to be assur'd, that the same Fate will befal
some of their Tormentors, whensoever they fall into the Hands of their Nation.
More of this you will have in the other Sheets.

The Toteros, a neighbouring Nation, came down from the Westward Mountains,
to the Saponas, desiring them to give them those Prisoners into their Hands,
to the Intent they might send them back into their own Nation,
being bound in Gratitude to be serviceable to the Sinnagers,
since not long ago, those Northern-Indians had taken
some of the Toteros Prisoners, and done them no Harm,
but treated them civilly whilst among them, sending them,
with Safety, back to their own People, and affirming,
that it would be the best Method to preserve Peace on all Sides.
At that time these Toteros, Saponas, and the Keyauwees,
3 small Nations, were going to live together, by which they thought
they should strengthen themselves, and become formidable to their Enemies.
The Reasons offer'd by the Toteros being heard, the Sapona King,
with the Consent of his Counsellors, deliver'd the Sinnagers up
to the Toteros, to conduct them home.

{Friday.}
Friday Morning, the old King having shew'd us 2 of his Horses,
that were as fat, as if they had belong'd to the Dutch Troopers,
left us, and went to look after his Bever-Traps, there being
abundance of those amphibious Animals in this River, and the Creeks adjoining.
Taken with the Pleasantness of the Place, we walk'd along the River-side,
where we found a very delightful Island, made by the River, and a Branch;
there being several such Plots of Ground environ'd with this Silver Stream,
which are fit Pastures for Sheep, and free from any offensive Vermin.
Nor can any thing be desired by a contented Mind, as to a pleasant Situation,
but what may here be found; Every Step presenting some new Object,
which still adds Invitation to the Traveller in these Parts.
Our Indian King and his Wife entertain'd us very respectfully.

{Saturday.  Jan. 31.}
On Saturday, the Indians brought in some Swans, and Geese,
which we had our Share of.  One of their Doctors took me to his Cabin,
and shew'd me a great Quantity of medicinal Drugs, the Produce of those Parts;
Relating their Qualities as to the Emunctories they work'd by,
and what great Maladies he had heal'd by them.  This Evening,
came to us the Horses, with the Remainder of our Company, their Indian Guide
(who was a Youth of this Nation) having kill'd, in their Way, a very fat Doe,
Part of which they brought to us.

{Sunday.}
This day, the King sent out all his able Hunters, to kill Game
for a great Feast, that was to be kept at their Departure, from the Town,
which they offer'd to sell me for a small matter.  That Piece of Ground,
with a little Trouble, would make an Englishman a most curious Settlement,
containing above a Mile square of rich Land.  This Evening,
came down some Toteros, tall, likely Men, having great Plenty of Buffelos,
Elks, and Bears, with other sort of Deer amongst them,
which strong Food makes large, robust Bodies.  Enquiring of them,
if they never got any of the Bezoar Stone, and giving them a Description
how it was found, the Indians told me, they had great plenty of it;
and ask'd me, What use I could make of it?  I answer'd them,
That the white Men us'd it in Physick, and that I would buy some of them,
if they would get it against I came that way again.  Thereupon, one of them
pull'd out a Leather-Pouch, wherein was some of it in Powder;
he was a notable Hunter, and affirm'd to me, That that Powder,
blown into the Eyes, strengthen'd the Sight and Brain exceedingly,
that being the most common Use they made of it.  I bought, for 2 or 3 Flints,
a large Peach-Loaf, made up with a pleasant sort of Seed;
and this did us a singular Kindness, in our Journey.  Near the Town,
within their clear'd Land, are several Bagnios, or Sweating-Houses,
made of Stone, in Shape like a large Oven.  These they make much Use of;
especially, for any Pains in the Joints, got by Cold, or Travelling.
At Night, as we lay in our Beds, there arose the most violent N.W. Wind
I ever knew.  The first Puff blew down all the Palisadoes that fortify'd
the Town; and I thought it would have blown us all into the River,
together with the Houses.  Our one-ey'd King, who pretends much
to the Art of Conjuration, ran out in the most violent Hurry,
and in the Middle of the Town, fell to his Necromantick Practice;
tho' I thought he would have been blown away or kill'd,
before the Devil and he could have exchang'd half a dozen Words;
but in two Minutes, the Wind was ceas'd, and it became as great a Calm,
as ever I knew in my Life.  As I much admir'd at that sudden Alteration,
the old Man told me, the Devil was very angry, and had done thus,
because they had not put the Sinnagers to Death.

{Monday.}
On Monday Morning, our whole Company, with the Horses,
set out from the Sapona-Indian Town, after having seen some of the Locust,
which is gotten thereabouts, the same Sort that bears Honey.
Going over several Creeks, very convenient for Water-Mills,
about 8 Miles from the Town, we pass'd over a very pretty River,
call'd Rocky River, a fit Name, having a Ridge of high Mountains running
from its Banks, to the Eastward; and disgorging itself into Sapona-River;
so that there is a most pleasant and convenient Neck of Land,
betwixt both Rivers, lying upon a Point, where many thousand Acres
may be fenced in, without much Cost or Labour.  You can scarce go a Mile,
without meeting with one of these small swift Currents,
here being no Swamps to be found, but pleasant, dry Roads
all over the Country.  The Way that we went this day, was as full of Stones,
as any which Craven, in the West of Yorkshire, could afford,
and having nothing but Moggisons on my Feet, I was so lam'd
by this stony Way, that I thought I must have taken up some Stay
in those Parts.  We went, this day, not above 15 or 20 Miles.
After we had supp'd, and all lay down to sleep, there came a Wolf
close to the Fire-side, where we lay.  My Spaniel soon discover'd him,
at which, one of our Company fir'd a Gun at the Beast; but, I believe,
there was a Mistake in the loading of it, for it did him no Harm.
The Wolf stay'd till he had almost loaded again, but the Bitch making
a great Noise, at last left us and went aside.  We had no sooner laid down,
but he approach'd us again, yet was more shy, so that we could not get
a Shot at him.

{Tuesday.}
Next day, we had 15 Miles farther to the Keyauwees.  The Land
is more mountainous, but extremely pleasant, and an excellent Place
for the breeding Sheep, Goats, and Horses; or Mules, if the English
were once brought to the Experience of the Usefulness of those Creatures.
The Valleys are here very rich.  At Noon, we pass'd over
such another stony River, as that eight Miles from Sapona.
This is call'd Heighwaree, and affords as good blue Stone for Mill-Stones,
as that from Cologn, good Rags, some Hones, and large Pebbles,
in great abundance, besides Free-Stone of several Sorts, all very useful.
I knew one of these Hones made use of by an Acquaintance of mine,
and it prov'd rather better than any from Old Spain, or elsewhere.
The Veins of Marble are very large and curious on this River,
and the Banks thereof.

Five Miles from this River, to the N.W. stands the Keyauwees Town.
They are fortify'd in, with wooden Puncheons, like Sapona,
being a People much of the same Number.  Nature hath so fortify'd this Town,
with Mountains, that were it a Seat of War, it might easily
be made impregnable; having large Corn-Fields joining to their Cabins,
and a Savanna near the Town, at the Foot of these Mountains,
that is capable of keeping some hundred Heads of Cattle.  And all this
environ'd round with very high Mountains, so that no hard Wind ever troubles
these Inhabitants.  Those high Clifts have no Grass growing on them,
and very few Trees, which are very short, and stand at a great Distance
one from another.  The Earth is of a red Colour, and seems to me
to be wholly design'd by Nature for the Production of Minerals,
being of too hot a Quality, to suffer any Verdure upon its Surface.
These Indians make use of Lead-Ore, to paint their Faces withal,
which they get in the neighbouring Mountains.  As for the refining of Metals,
the Indians are wholly ignorant of it, being content with the Realgar.
But if it be my Chance, once more to visit these Hilly Parts,
I shall make a longer Stay amongst them:  For were a good Vein of Lead
found out, and work'd by an ingenious Hand, it might be of no small Advantage
to the Undertaker, there being great Convenience for smelting,
either by Bellows or Reverberation; and the Working of these Mines
might discover some that are much richer.

At the Top of one of these Mountains, is a Cave that 100 Men
may fit very conveniently to dine in; whether natural, or artificial,
I could not learn.  There is a fine Bole between this Place, and the Saps.
These Valleys thus hemm'd in with Mountains, would (doubtless) prove
a good place for propagating some sort of Fruits, that our Easterly Winds
commonly blast.  The Vine could not miss of thriving well here;
but we of the Northern Climate are neither Artists, nor curious,
in propagating that pleasant and profitable Vegetable.  Near the Town,
is such another Current, as Heighwaree.  We being six in Company,
divided ourselves into Two Parties; and it was my Lot to be
at the House of Keyauwees Jack, who is King of that People.
He is a Congeree-Indian, and ran away when he was a Boy.
He got this Government by Marriage with the Queen; the Female Issue
carrying the Heritage, for fear of Impostors; the Savages
well knowing, how much Frailty possesses the Indian Women,
betwixt the Garters and the Girdle.

{Wednesday.}
The next day, having some occasion to write, the Indian King, who saw me,
believ'd that he could write as well as I.  Whereupon, I wrote a Word,
and gave it him to copy, which he did with more Exactness,
than any European could have done, that was illiterate.  It was so well,
that he who could read mine, might have done the same by his.
Afterwards, he took great Delight in making Fish-hooks of his own Invention,
which would have been a good Piece for an Antiquary to have puzzled
his Brains withal, in tracing out the Characters of all the Oriental Tongues.
He sent for several Indians to his Cabin, to look at his Handy-work,
and both he and they thought, I could read his Writing
as well as I could my own.  I had a Manual in my Pocket,
that had King David's Picture in it, in one of his private Retirements.
The Indian ask'd me, Who that Figure represented?  I told him,
It was the Picture of a good King, that liv'd according to
the Rules of Morality, doing to all as he would be done by,
ordering all his Life to the Service of the Creator of all things;
and being now above us all, in Heaven, with God Almighty,
who had rewarded him with all the delightful Pleasures imaginable
in the other World, for his Obedience to him in this; I concluded,
with telling them, that we received nothing here below,
as Food, Raiment, &c. but what came from that Omnipotent Being.
They listened to my Discourse with a profound Silence, assuring me,
that they believ'd what I said to be true.  No Man living will ever be able
to make these Heathens sensible of the Happiness of a future State,
except he now and then mentions some lively carnal Representation,
which may quicken their Apprehensions, and make them thirst
after such a gainful Exchange; for, were the best Lecture
that ever was preach'd by Man, given to an ignorant sort of People,
in a more learned Style, than their mean Capacities are able to understand,
the Intent would prove ineffectual, and the Hearers would be left
in a greater Labyrinth than their Teacher found them in.
But dispense the Precepts of our Faith according to the Pupil's Capacity,
and there is nothing in our Religion, but what an indifferent Reason is,
in some measure, able to comprehend; tho' a New-England Minister
blames the French Jesuits for this way of Proceeding, as being
quite contrary to a true Christian Practice, and affirms it to be no ready,
or true Method, to establish a lively Representation of our Christian Belief
amongst these Infidels.

All the Indians hereabouts carefully preserve the Bones of the Flesh
they eat, and burn them, as being of Opinion, that if they omitted
that Custom, the Game would leave their Country, and they should not be able
to maintain themselves by their Hunting.  Most of these Indians
wear Mustachoes, or Whiskers, which is rare; by reason the Indians
are a People that commonly pull the Hair of their Faces, and other Parts,
up by the Roots, and suffer none to grow.  Here is plenty of Chesnuts,
which are rarely found in Carolina, and never near the Sea, or Salt-Water;
tho' they are frequently in such Places in Virginia.

At the other House, where our Fellow-Travellers lay, they had provided a Dish,
in great Fashion amongst the Indians, which was Two young Fawns,
taken out of the Doe's Bellies, and boil'd in the same slimy Bags
Nature had plac'd them in, and one of the Country-Hares,
stew'd with the Guts in her Belly, and her Skin with the Hair on.
This new-fashion'd Cookery wrought Abstinence in our Fellow-Travellers,
which I somewhat wonder'd at, because one of them made nothing
of eating Allegators, as heartily as if it had been Pork and Turneps.
The Indians dress most things after the Wood-cock Fashion,
never taking the Guts out.  At the House we lay at, there was
very good Entertainment of Venison, Turkies, and Bears; and which is customary
amongst the Indians, the Queen had a Daughter by a former Husband,
who was the beautifullest Indian I ever saw, and had an Air of Majesty
with her, quite contrary to the general Carriage of the Indians.
She was very kind to the English, during our Abode, as well as
her Father and Mother.

{Thursday.}
This Morning, most of our Company having some Inclination
to go straight away for Virginia, when they left this Place;
I and one more took our leaves of them, resolving (with God's Leave)
to see North-Carolina, one of the Indians setting us in our way.
The rest being indifferent which way they went, desired us, by all means,
to leave a Letter for them, at the Achonechy-Town.  The Indian
that put us in our Path, had been a Prisoner amongst the Sinnagers;
but had out-run them, although they had cut his Toes, and half his Feet away,
which is a Practice common amongst them.  They first raise the Skin,
then cut away half the Feet, and so wrap the Skin over the Stumps,
and make a present Cure of the Wounds.  This commonly disables them
from making their Escape, they being not so good Travellers as before,
and the Impression of their Half-Feet making it easy to trace them.
However, this Fellow was got clear of them, but had little Heart
to go far from home, and carry'd always a Case of Pistols in his Girdle,
besides a Cutlass, and a Fuzee.  Leaving the rest of our Company
at the Indian-Town, we travell'd, that day, about 20 Miles,
in very cold, frosty Weather; and pass'd over two pretty Rivers,
something bigger than Heighwaree, but not quite so stony.  We took
these two Rivers to make one of the Northward Branches of Cape-Fair River,
but afterwards found our Mistake.

{Friday.}
The next day, we travell'd over very good Land, but full of Free-Stone,
and Marble, which pinch'd our Feet severely.  We took up our Quarters
in a sort of Savanna-Ground, that had very few Trees in it.
The Land was good, and had several Quarries of Stone, but not loose,
as the others us'd to be.

{Saturday.}
Next Morning, we got our Breakfasts of Parch'd Corn, having nothing but that
to subsist on for above 100 Miles.  All the Pine-Trees were vanish'd,
for we had seen none for two days.  We pass'd through a delicate rich Soil
this day; no great Hills, but pretty Risings, and Levels, which made
a beautiful Country.  We likewise pass'd over three Rivers this day;
the first about the bigness of Rocky River, the other not much differing
in Size.  Then we made not the least Question, but we had pass'd over
the North-West Branch of Cape-Fair, travelling that day above 30 Miles.
We were much taken with the Fertility and Pleasantness of the Neck of Land
between these two Branches, and no less pleas'd, that we had pass'd the River,
which us'd to frighten Passengers from fording it.  At last,
determining to rest on the other side of a Hill, which we saw before us;
when we were on the Top thereof, there appear'd to us such another delicious,
rapid Stream, as that of Sapona, having large Stones,
about the bigness of an ordinary House, lying up and down the River.
As the Wind blew very cold at N.W. and we were very weary, and hungry,
the Swiftness of the Current gave us some cause to fear; but, at last,
we concluded to venture over that Night.  Accordingly, we stripp'd,
and with great Difficulty, (by God's Assistance) got safe
to the North-side of the famous Hau-River, by some called Reatkin;
the Indians differing in the Names of Places, according to their
several Nations.  It is call'd Hau-River, from the Sissipahau Indians,
who dwell upon this Stream, which is one of the main Branches of Cape-Fair,
there being rich Land enough to contain some Thousands of Families;
for which Reason, I hope, in a short time, it will be planted.
This River is much such another as Sapona; both seeming to run a vast way
up the Country.  Here is plenty of good Timber, and especially,
of a Scaly-bark'd Oak; And as there is Stone enough in both Rivers,
and the Land is extraordinary Rich, no Man that will be content
within the Bounds of Reason, can have any grounds to dislike it.
And they that are otherwise, are the best Neighbours, when farthest of.

{Sunday.}
As soon as it was day, we set out for the Achonechy-Town,
it being, by Estimation, 20 Miles off, which, I believe, is pretty exact.
We were got about half way, (meeting great Gangs of Turkies) when we saw,
at a Distance, 30 loaded Horses, coming on the Road, with four or five Men,
on other Jades, driving them.  We charg'd our Piece, and went up to them:
Enquiring, whence they came from?  They told us, from Virginia.
The leading Man's Name was Massey, who was born about Leeds
in Yorkshire.  He ask'd, from whence we came?  We told him.
Then he ask'd again, Whether we wanted any thing that he had? telling us,
we should be welcome to it.  We accepted of Two Wheaten Biskets,
and a little Ammunition.  He advised us, by all means,
to strike down the Country for Ronoack, and not think of Virginia,
because of the Sinnagers, of whom they were afraid, tho' so well arm'd,
and numerous.  They persuaded us also, to call upon one Enoe Will,
as we went to Adshusheer, for that he would conduct us safe
among the English, giving him the Character of a very faithful Indian,
which we afterwards found true by Experience.  The Virginia-Men
asking our Opinion of the Country we were then in? we told them,
it was a very pleasant one.  They were all of the same Opinion, and affirm'd,
That they had never seen 20 Miles of such extraordinary rich Land,
lying all together, like that betwixt Hau-River and the Achonechy Town.
Having taken our Leaves of each other, we set forward; and the Country,
thro' which we pass'd, was so delightful, that it gave us
a great deal of Satisfaction.  About Three a Clock, we reach'd the Town,
and the Indians presently brought us good fat Bear, and Venison,
which was very acceptable at that time.  Their Cabins were hung
with a good sort of Tapestry, as fat Bear, and barbakued or dried Venison;
no Indians having greater Plenty of Provisions than these.
The Savages do, indeed, still possess the Flower of Carolina,
the English enjoying only the Fag-end of that fine Country.
We had not been in the Town 2 Hours, when Enoe-Will came into
the King's Cabin; which was our Quarters.  We ask'd him,
if he would conduct us to the English, and what he would have for his Pains;
he answer'd, he would go along with us, and for what he was to have,
he left that to our Discretion.

{Monday.}
The next Morning, we set out, with Enoe-Will, towards Adshusheer,
leaving the Virginia Path, and striking more to the Eastward,
for Ronoack.  Several Indians were in our Company belonging
to Will's Nation, who are the Shoccories, mixt with the Enoe-Indians,
and those of the Nation of Adshusheer.  Enoe-Will is their chief Man,
and rules as far as the Banks of Reatkin.  It was a sad stony Way
to Adshusheer.  We went over a small River by Achonechy,
and in this 14 Miles, through several other Streams, which empty themselves
into the Branches of Cape-Fair.  The stony Way made me quite lame;
so that I was an Hour or two behind the rest; but honest Will
would not leave me, but bid me welcome when we came to his House,
feasting us with hot Bread, and Bears-Oil; which is wholsome Food
for Travellers.  There runs a pretty Rivulet by this Town.
Near the Plantation, I saw a prodigious overgrown Pine-Tree,
having not seen any of that Sort of Timber for above 125 Miles:
They brought us 2 Cocks, and pull'd their larger Feathers off,
never plucking the lesser, but singeing them off.  I took one of these Fowls
in my Hand, to make it cleaner than the Indian had, pulling out
his Guts and Liver, which I laid in a Bason; notwithstanding which,
he kept such a Struggling for a considerable time, that I had much ado
to hold him in my Hands.  The Indians laugh'd at me, and told me,
that Enoe-Will had taken a Cock of an Indian that was not at home,
and the Fowl was design'd for another Use.  I conjectur'd,
that he was design'd for an Offering to their God, who, they say,
hurts them, (which is the Devil.)  In this Struggling, he bled afresh,
and there issued out of his Body more Blood than commonly
such Creatures afford.  Notwithstanding all this, we cook'd him, and eat him;
and if he was design'd for him, cheated the Devil.  The Indians keep
many Cocks, but seldom above one Hen, using very often such wicked Sacrifices,
as I mistrusted this Fowl was design'd for.

Our Guide and Landlord Enoe-Will was of the best and most agreeable Temper
that ever I met with in an Indian, being always ready
to serve the English, not out of Gain, but real Affection;
which makes him apprehensive of being poison'd by some wicked Indians,
and was therefore very earnest with me, to promise him to revenge his Death,
if it should so happen.  He brought some of his chief Men into his Cabin,
and 2 of them having a Drum, and a Rattle, sung by us, as we lay in Bed,
and struck up their Musick to serenade and welcome us to their Town.
And tho' at last, we fell asleep, yet they continu'd their Consort
till Morning.  These Indians are fortify'd in, as the former,
and are much addicted to a Sport they call Chenco, which is carry'd on
with a Staff and a Bowl made of Stone, which they trundle upon a smooth Place,
like a Bowling-Green, made for that Purpose, as I have mention'd before.

{Tuesday.}
Next Morning, we set out, with our Guide, and several other Indians,
who intended to go to the English, and buy Rum.  We design'd for a Nation
about 40 Miles from Adshusheer, call'd the Lower Quarter:
The first Night, we lay in a rich Perkoson, or low Ground,
that was hard-by a Creek, and good dry Land.

{Wednesday.}
The next day, we went over several Tracts of rich Land,
but mix'd with Pines and other indifferent Soil.  In our way,
there stood a great Stone about the Size of a large Oven, and hollow;
this the Indians took great Notice of, putting some Tobacco
into the Concavity, and spitting after it.  I ask'd them
the Reason of their so doing, but they made me no Answer.  In the Evening,
we pass'd over a pleasant Rivulet, with a fine gravelly Bottom,
having come over such another that Morning.  On the other side of this River,
we found the Indian Town, which was a Parcel of nasty smoaky Holes,
much like the Waterrees; their Town having a great Swamp
running directly through the Middle thereof.  The Land here
begins to abate of its Height, and has some few Swamps.
Most of these Indians have but one Eye; but what Mischance or Quarrel
has bereav'd them of the other I could not learn.  They were not
so free to us, as most of the other Indians had been; Victuals being
somewhat scarce among them.  However, we got enough to satisfy our Appetites.
I saw, among these Men, very long Arrows, headed with Pieces of Glass,
which they had broken from Bottles.  They had shap'd them neatly,
like the Head of a Dart; but which way they did it, I can't tell.
We had not been at this Town above an Hour, when two of our Company,
that had bought a Mare of John Stewart, came up to us,
having receiv'd a Letter by one of Will's Indians, who was very cautious,
and asked a great many Questions, to certifie him of the Person,
e'er he would deliver the Letter.  They had left the Trader,
and one that came from South-Carolina with us, to go to Virginia;
these Two being resolved to go to Carolina with us.

{Thursday.}
This Day fell much Rain, so we staid at the Indian Town.

{Friday.}
This Morning, we set out early, being four English-Men,
besides several Indians.  We went 10 Miles, and were then stopp'd
by the Freshes of Enoe-River, which had rais'd it so high,
that we could not pass over, till it was fallen.  I enquir'd of my Guide,
Where this River disgorg'd it self?  He said, It was Enoe-River,
and run into a Place call'd Enoe-Bay, near his Country, which he left
when he was a Boy; by which I perceiv'd, he was one of the Cores by Birth:
This being a Branch of Neus-River.

{Saturday.}
This Day, our Fellow-Traveller's Mare ran away from him;
wherefore, Will went back as far as the lower Quarter, and brought her back.

{Sunday.}
The next Day, early, came two Tuskeruro Indians to the other side
of the River, but could not get over.  They talk'd much to us,
but we understood them not.  In the Afternoon, Will came
with the Mare, and had some Discourse with them; they told him,
The English, to whom he was going, were very wicked People;
and, That they threatned the Indians for Hunting near their Plantations.
These Two Fellows were going among the Schoccores and Achonechy Indians,
to sell their Wooden Bowls and Ladles for Raw-Skins, which they make
great Advantage of, hating that any of these Westward Indians
should have any Commerce with the English, which would prove a Hinderance
to their Gains.  Their Stories deterr'd an Old Indian and his Son,
from going any farther; but Will told us, Nothing they had said
should frighten him, he believing them to be a couple of Hog-stealers;
and that the English only sought Restitution of their Losses, by them;
and that this was the only ground for their Report.  Will had a Slave,
a Sissipahau-Indian by Nation, who killed us several Turkies,
and other Game, on which we feasted.

{Monday.}
This River is near as large as Reatkin; the South-side having
curious Tracts of good Land, the Banks high, and Stone-Quarries.
The Tuskeruros being come to us, we ventur'd over the River,
which we found to be a strong Current, and the Water about Breast-high.
However, we all got safe to the North-Shore, which is but poor,
white, sandy Land, and bears no Timber, but small shrubby Oaks.
We went about 10 Miles, and sat down at the Falls of a large Creek,
where lay mighty Rocks, the Water making a strange Noise,
as if a great many Water-Mills were going at once.  I take this to be
the Falls of Neus-Creek, called by the Indians, `Wee quo Whom'.
We lay here all Night.  My Guide Will desiring to see the Book
that I had about me, I lent it him; and as he soon found
the Picture of King David, he asked me several Questions
concerning the Book, and Picture, which I resolv'd him, and invited him
to become a Christian.  He made me a very sharp Reply, assuring me,
That he lov'd the English extraordinary well, and did believe their Ways
to be very good for those that had already practis'd them,
and had been brought up therein; But as for himself, he was too much in Years
to think of a Change, esteeming it not proper for Old People
to admit of such an Alteration.  However, he told me,
If I would take his Son Jack, who was then about 14 Years of Age,
and teach him to talk in that Book, and make Paper speak,
which they call our Way of Writing, he would wholly resign him to my Tuition;
telling me, he was of Opinion, I was very well affected to the Indians.

{Tuesday.}
The next Morning, we set out early, and I perceiv'd that these Indians
were in some fear of Enemies; for they had an Old Man with them,
who was very cunning and circumspect, wheresoever he saw any Marks of Footing,
or of any Fire that had been made; going out of his Way, very often,
to look for these Marks.  We went, this day, above 30 Miles,
over a very level Country, and most Pine Land, yet intermix'd
with some Quantities of Marble; a good Range for Cattel,
though very indifferent for Swine.  We had now lost our rapid Streams,
and were come to slow, dead Waters, of a brown Colour,
proceeding from the Swamps, much like the Sluices in Holland,
where the Track-Scoots go along.  In the Afternoon, we met two Tuskeruros,
who told us, That there was a Company of Hunters not far of,
and if we walk'd stoutly, we might reach them that Night.
But Will and He that own'd the Mare, being gone before,
and the Old Indian tired, we rested, that Night, in the Woods,
making a good light Fire, Wood being very plentiful in these Parts.

{Wednesday.}
Next Day, about 10 a Clock, we struck out of the Way,
by the Advice of our Old Indian.  We had not gone past two Miles,
e'er we met with about 500 Tuskeruros in one Hunting-Quarter.
They had made themselves Streets of Houses, built with Pine-Bark,
not with round Tops, as they commonly use, but Ridge-Fashion, after the manner
of most other Indians.  We got nothing amongst them but Corn,
Flesh being not plentiful, by reason of the great Number of their People.
For tho' they are expert Hunters, yet they are too populous for one Range;
which makes Venison very scarce to what it is amongst other Indians,
that are fewer; no Savages living so well for Plenty, as those near the Sea.
I saw, amongst these, a Hump-back'd Indian, which was the only crooked one
I ever met withal.  About two a Clock, we reach'd one of their Towns,
in which there was no body left, but an Old Woman or two; the rest being gone
to their Hunting-Quarters.  We could find no Provision at that Place.
We had a Tuskeruro that came in company with us, from the lower Quarter,
who took us to his Cabin, and gave us what it afforded, which was Corn-meat.

{Thursday.}
This Day, we pass'd through several Swamps, and going not above a dozen Miles,
came to a Cabin, the Master whereof us'd to trade amongst the English.
He told us, If we would stay Two Nights, he would conduct us safe to them,
himself designing, at that time, to go and fetch some Rum;
so we resolved to tarry for his Company.  During our Stay,
there happen'd to be a Young Woman troubled with Fits.
The Doctor who was sent for to assist her, laid her on her Belly,
and made a small Incision with Rattle-Snake-Teeth; then laying his Mouth
to the Place, he suck'd out near a Quart of black conglutinated Blood,
and Serum.  Our Landlord gave us the Tail of a Bever,
which was a choice Food.  {Friday.}  There happen'd also to be
a Burial of one of their Dead, which Ceremony is much the same with
that of the Santees, who make a great Feast at the Interment of their Corps.
The small Runs of Water hereabout, afford great Plenty of Craw-Fish,
full as large as those in England, and nothing inferior in Goodness.

{Saturday.}
Saturday Morning, our Patron, with Enoe Will, and his Servant,
set out with us, for the English.  In the Afternoon, we ferried
over a River, (in a Canoe) called by the Indians, Chattookau,
which is the N.W. Branch of Neus-River.  We lay in the Swamp,
where some Indians invited us to go to their Quarters,
which some of our Company accepted, but got nothing extraordinary,
except a dozen Miles March out of their Way:  The Country here
is very thick of Indian Towns and Plantations.

{Sunday.}
We were forced to march, this day, for Want of Provisions.  About 10 a Clock,
we met an Indian that had got a parcel of Shad-Fish ready barbaku'd.
We bought 24 of them, for a dress'd Doe-Skin, and so went on,
through many Swamps, finding, this day, the long ragged Moss on the Trees,
which we had not seen for above 600 Miles.  In the Afternoon,
we came upon the Banks of Pampticough, about 20 Miles above
the English Plantations by Water, though not so far by Land.
The Indian found a Canoe, which he had hidden, in which
we all got over, and went about six Miles farther.  We lay, that Night,
under two or three Pieces of Bark, at the Foot of a large Oak.
There fell abundance of Snow and Rain in the Night, with much
Thunder and Lightning.

{Monday.}
Next Day, it clear'd up, and it being about 12 Miles to the English,
about half-way we passed over a deep Creek, and came safe
to Mr. Richard Smith's, of Pampticough-River, in North-Carolina;
where being well receiv'd by the Inhabitants, and pleas'd with
the Goodness of the Country, we all resolv'd to continue.



                                   FINIS.





                                       A
                                  DESCRIPTION
                                      of
                               North-CAROLINA.



{Carolina how bounded.}
The Province of Carolina is separated from Virginia by a due West-Line,
which begins at Currituck-Inlet, in 36 Degrees, 30 Minutes,
of Northern-Latitude, and extends indefinitely to the Westward,
and thence to the Southward, as far as 29 Degrees; which is a vast Tract
of Sea-Coast.  But having already treated, as far as is necessary,
concerning South-Carolina, I shall confine myself, in the ensuing Sheets,
to give my Reader a Description of that Part of the Country only,
which lies betwixt Currituck and Cape-Fair, and is almost 34 Deg. North.
And this is commonly call'd North Carolina.

This Part of Carolina is faced with a Chain of Sand-Banks,
which defends it from the Violence and Insults of the Atlantick Ocean;
by which Barrier, a vast Sound is hemm'd in, which fronts
the Mouths of the Navigable and Pleasant Rivers of this Fertile Country,
and into which they disgorge themselves.  {Inlets.}  Thro' the same
are Inlets of several Depths of Water.  Some of their Channels
admit only of Sloops, Brigantines, small Barks, and Ketches;
and such are Currituck, Ronoak, and up the Sound above Hatteras:
Whilst others can receive Ships of Burden, as Ocacock, Topsail-Inlet,
and Cape-Fair; as appears by my Chart.

{First Colony of Carolina.}
The first Discovery and Settlement of this Country was by the Procurement
of Sir Walter Raleigh, in Conjunction with some publick-spirited Gentlemen
of that Age, under the Protection of Queen Elizabeth;
for which Reason it was then named Virginia, being begun on that Part
called Ronoak-Island, where the Ruins of a Fort are to be seen at this day,
as well as some old English Coins which have been lately found;
and a Brass-Gun, a Powder-Horn, and one small Quarter deck-Gun,
made of Iron Staves, and hoop'd with the same Metal; which Method
of making Guns might very probably be made use of in those Days,
for the Convenience of Infant-Colonies.

{Hatteras Indians.}
A farther Confirmation of this we have from the Hatteras Indians,
who either then lived on Ronoak-Island, or much frequented it.
These tell us, that several of their Ancestors were white People,
and could talk in a Book, as we do; the Truth of which is confirm'd
by gray Eyes being found frequently amongst these Indians, and no others.
They value themselves extremely for their Affinity to the English,
and are ready to do them all friendly Offices.  It is probable,
that this Settlement miscarry'd for want of timely Supplies from England;
or thro' the Treachery of the Natives, for we may reasonably suppose that
the English were forced to cohabit with them, for Relief and Conversation;
and that in process of Time, they conform'd themselves
to the Manners of their Indian Relations.  And thus we see,
how apt Humane Nature is to degenerate.

{Sir Walter Raleigh's Ship.}
I cannot forbear inserting here, a pleasant Story that passes
for an uncontested Truth amongst the Inhabitants of this Place;
which is, that the Ship which brought the first Colonies,
does often appear amongst them, under Sail, in a gallant Posture,
which they call Sir Walter Raleigh's Ship, And the truth of this
has been affirm'd to me, by Men of the best Credit in the Country.

{Second Settlement of North-Carolina.}
A second Settlement of this Country was made about fifty Years ago,
in that part we now call Albemarl-County, and chiefly in Chuwon Precinct,
by several substantial Planters, from Virginia, and other Plantations;
Who finding mild Winters, and a fertile Soil, beyond Expectation,
producing every thing that was planted, to a prodigious Increase;
their Cattle, Horses, Sheep, and Swine, breeding very fast,
and passing the Winter, without any Assistance from the Planter;
so that every thing seem'd to come by Nature, the Husbandman living
almost void of Care, and free from those Fatigues which are absolutely
requisite in Winter-Countries, for providing Fodder and other Necessaries;
these Encouragements induc'd them to stand their Ground,
altho' but a handful of People, seated at great Distances one from another,
and amidst a vast number of Indians of different Nations,
who were then in Carolina.  Nevertheless, I say, the Fame of this
new-discover'd Summer-Country spread thro' the neighbouring Colonies,
and, in a few Years, drew a considerable Number of Families thereto,
who all found Land enough to settle themselves in, (had they been
many Thousands more) and that which was very good and commodiously seated,
both for Profit and Pleasure.  {Pleasantness of Carolina.}
And indeed, most of the Plantations in Carolina naturally enjoy
a noble Prospect of large and spacious Rivers, pleasant Savanna's,
and fine Meadows, with their green Liveries, interwoven with
beautiful Flowers, of most glorious Colours, which the several Seasons afford;
hedg'd in with pleasant Groves of the ever-famous Tulip-tree,
the stately Laurel, and Bays, equalizing the Oak in Bigness and Growth;
Myrtles, Jessamines, Wood-bines, Honysuckles, and several other
fragrant Vines and Ever-greens, whose aspiring Branches
shadow and interweave themselves with the loftiest Timbers,
yielding a pleasant Prospect, Shade and Smell, proper Habitations
for the Sweet-singing Birds, that melodiously entertain such as travel
thro' the Woods of Carolina.

The Planters possessing all these Blessings, and the Produce
of great Quantities of Wheat and Indian Corn, in which this Country
is very fruitful, as likewise in Beef, Pork, Tallow, Hides, Deer-Skins,
and Furs; for these Commodities the New-England-Men and Bermudians
visited Carolina in their Barks and Sloops, and carry'd out what they made,
bringing them, in Exchange, Rum, Sugar, Salt, Molosses,
and some wearing Apparel, tho' the last at very extravagant Prices.

As the Land is very fruitful, so are the Planters kind and hospitable
to all that come to visit them; there being very few Housekeepers,
but what live very nobly, and give away more Provisions to Coasters and Guests
who come to see them, than they expend amongst their own Families.



    Of the Inlets and Havens of this Country.


{Currituck Inlet.}
The Bar of Currituck being the Northermost of this Country, presents itself
first to be treated of.  It lies in 36 deg. 30 min. and the Course over
is S.W. by W. having not above seven or eight Foot on the Bar,
tho' a good Harbour, when you are over, where you may ride safe,
and deep enough; but this Part of the Sound is so full of Shoals,
as not to suffer any thing to trade thro' it, that draws above
three Foot Water, which renders it very incommodious.  However,
this affects but some part of the Country, and may be easily remedied,
by carrying their Produce, in small Craft, down to the Vessels,
which ride near the Inlet.

{Ronoak Inlet.}
Ronoak Inlet has Ten Foot Water, the Course over the Bar
is almost W. which leads you thro' the best of the Channel.  This Bar,
as well as Currituck, often shifts by the Violence of the N.E. Storms,
both lying expos'd to those Winds.  Notwithstanding which,
a considerable Trade might be carry'd on, provided there was a Pilot
to bring them in; for it lies convenient for a large Part of this Colony,
whose Product would very easily allow of that Charge; Lat. 35 deg. 50 min.

{Hatteras Inlet.}
The Inlet of Hatteras lies to the Westward of the Cape,
round which is an excellent Harbour.  When the Wind blows hard
at N. or N.E. if you keep a small League from the Cape-Point,
you will have 3, 4, and 5 Fathom, the outermost Shoals lying
about 7 or 8 Leagues from Shoar.  As you come into the Inlet,
keep close to the South Breakers, till you are over the Bar,
where you will have two Fathom at Low-Water.  You may come to an Anchor
in two Fathom and a Half when you are over, then steer over close aboard
the North Shoar, where is four Fathom, close to a Point of Marsh; then steer
up the Sound a long League, till you bring the North Cape of the Inlet
to bear S.S.E. half E. then steer W.N.W. the East-point of Bluff-Land
at Hatteras bearing E.N.E. the Southermost large Hammock towards Ocacock,
bearing S.S.W. half S. then you are in the Sound, over the Bar of Sand,
whereon is but 6 Foot Water; then your Course to Pampticough
is almost West.  It flows on these three Bars S.E. by E. 1/4 E. about
Eight of the Clock, unless there is a hard Gale of Wind at N.E. which
will make it flow two hours longer; but as soon as the Wind is down,
the Tides will have their natural Course:  A hard Gale at N. or N.W. will make
the Water ebb sometimes 24 hours, but still the Tide will ebb and flow,
tho' not seen by the turning thereof, but may be seen
by the Rising of the Water, and Falling of the same, Lat. 35d 20".

{Ocacock Inlet.}
Ocacock is the best Inlet and Harbour yet in this Country;
and has 13 Foot at Low-water upon the Bar.  There are two Channels;
one is but narrow, and lies close aboard the South Cape;
the other in the Middle, viz. between the Middle Ground,
and the South Shoar, and is above half a Mile wide.  The Bar itself
is but half a Cable's Length over, and then you are in 7 or 8 Fathom Water;
a good Harbour.  The Course into the Sound is N.N.W.  At High-water,
and Neap-tides, here is 18 Foot Water.  It lies S.W. from Hatteras Inlet.
Lat. 35d 8".

{Topsail Inlet.}
Topsail Inlet is above two Leagues to the Westward of Cape Look-out.
You have a fair Channel over the Bar, and two Fathom thereon,
and a good Harbour in five or six Fathom to come to an Anchor.
Your Course over this Bar is almost N.W.  Lat. 34d 44".

{Cape Fair Inlet and River.}
As for the Inlet and River of Cape Fair, I cannot give you
a better Information thereof, than has been already deliver'd
by the Gentlemen, who were sent on purpose, from Barbados,
to make a Discovery of that River, in the Year 1663, which is thus.


From Tuesday the 29th of September, to Friday the 2d of October,
we rang'd along the Shoar from Lat. 32 deg. 20 min. to Lat. 33 deg. 11 min.
but could discern no Entrance for our Ship, after we had pass'd
to the Northward of 32 deg. 40 min.  On Saturday, Octob. 3.
a violent Storm overtook us, the Wind between North and East;
which Easterly Winds and Foul Weather continu'd till Monday the 12th;
by reason of which Storms and Foul Weather, we were forced
to get off to Sea, to secure Ourselves and Ship, and were driven
by the Rapidity of a strong Current to Cape Hatteras in Lat. 35 deg. 30 min.
On Monday the 12th aforesaid, we came to an Anchor in seven Fathom
at Cape-Fair Road, and took the Meridian Altitude of the Sun,
and were in Latitude 33 deg. 43 min. the Wind continuing still easterly,
and foul Weather, till Thursday the 15th; and on Friday the 16th,
the Wind being at N.W. we weigh'd and sail'd up Cape-Fair-River,
some 4 or 5 Leagues, and came to an Anchor in 6 or 7 Fathom,
at which time several Indians came on board, and brought us
great Store of fresh Fish, large Mullets, young Bass, Shads,
and several other Sorts of very good well-tasted Fish.
On Saturday the 17th, we went down to the Cape, to see
the English Cattle, but could not find 'em, tho' we rounded the Cape:
And having an Indian Guide with us, here we rode till Oct. 24.
The Wind being against us, we could not go up the River with our Ship;
but went on shoar, and view'd the Land of those Quarters.  On Saturday,
we weigh'd, and sail'd up the River some 4 Leagues, or thereabouts.
Sunday the 25th, we weigh'd again, and row'd up the River, it being calm,
and got up some 14 Leagues from the Harbour's Mouth, where we mor'd our Ship.
On Monday Oct. the 26th, we went down with the Yawl, to Necoes,
an Indian Plantation, and view'd the Land there.  On Tuesday the 27th,
we row'd up the main River, with our Long-Boat, and 12 Men,
some 10 Leagues, or thereabouts.  On Wednesday the 28th,
we row'd up about 8 or 10 Leagues more.  Thursday the 29th,
was foul Weather, with much Rain and Wind, which forc'd us to make Huts,
and lie still.  Friday the 30th, we proceeded up the main River,
7 or 8 Leagues.  Saturday the 31st, we got up 3 or 4 Leagues more,
and came to a Tree that lay cross the River; but because our Provisions
were almost spent, we proceeded no farther, but return'd downward
before Night, and on Monday the 2d of November, we came aboard our Ship.
Tuesday the 3d, we lay still, to refresh ourselves.  On Wednesday the 4th,
we went 5 or 6 Leagues up the River, to search a Branch
that run out of the main River towards the N.W.  In which Branch
we went up 5 or 6 Leagues; but not liking the Land, return'd on board
that Night about Midnight, and call'd that Place Swampy-Branch.
Thursday, November the 5th, we stay'd aboard.  On Friday the 6th,
we went up Greens-River, the Mouth of it being against the Place at which
rode our Ship.  On Saturday the 7th, we proceeded up the said River,
some 14 or 15 Leagues in all, and found it ended in several small Branches;
The Land, for the most part, being marshy and Swamps, we return'd
towards our Ship, and got aboard it in the Night.  Sunday November the 8th,
we lay still, and on Monday the 9th, went again up the main River,
being well stock'd with Provisions, and all things necessary,
and proceeded upwards till Thursday noon, the 12th, at which time
we came to a Place, where were two Islands in the Middle of the River;
and by reason of the Crookedness of the River at that Place, several Trees
lay cross both Branches, which stop'd the Passage of each Branch,
so that we could proceed no farther with our Boat; but went up the River side
by Land, some 3 or 4 Miles, and found the River wider and wider.
So we return'd, leaving it, as far as we could see up a long Reach,
running N.E. we judging ourselves near fifty Leagues North
from the River's Mouth.  In our Return, we view'd the Land
on both Sides the River, and found as good Tracts of dry, well-wooded,
pleasant, and delightful Ground, as we have seen any where in the World,
with abundance of long thick Grass on it, the Land being very level,
with steep Banks on both Sides the River, and in some Places very high,
the Woods stor'd every where, with great Numbers of Deer and Turkies,
we never going on Shoar, but we saw of each Sort; as also
great Store of Partridges, Cranes, and Conies, in several Places;
we likewise heard several Wolves howling in the Woods,
and saw where they had torn a Deer in Pieces.  Also in the River
we saw great Store of Ducks, Teal, Widgeon; and in the Woods,
great Flocks of Parrakeeto's.  The Timber that the Woods afford,
for the most part, consists of Oaks of four or five Sorts,
all differing in Leaves, but each bearing very good Acorns.
We measur'd many of the Oaks in several Places, which we found to be,
in Bigness, some Two, some Three, and others almost Four Fathom in Height,
before you come to Boughs or Limbs; forty, fifty, sixty Foot, and some more;
and those Oaks very common in the upper Parts of both Rivers;
also a very tall large Tree of great Bigness, which some call Cyprus,
the right Name we know not, growing in Swamps.  Likewise Walnut, Birch,
Beech, Maple, Ash, Bay, Willow, Alder, and Holly; and in the lowermost Parts
innumerable Pines, tall and good for Boards or Masts,
growing, for the most part, in barren and sandy, but in some Places
up the River, in good Ground, being mixt amongst Oaks and other Timbers.
We saw Mulberry-Trees, Multitudes of Grape-Vines, and some Grapes
which we eat of.  We found a very large and good Tract of Land,
on the N.W. Side of the River, thin of Timber, except here and there
a very great Oak, and full of Grass, commonly as high
as a Man's Middle, and in many Places to his Shoulders,
where we saw many Deer, and Turkies; one Deer having very large Horns,
and great Body, therefore call'd it Stag-Park.  It being
a very pleasant and delightful Place, we travell'd in it several Miles,
but saw no End thereof.  So we return'd to our Boat, and proceeded
down the River, and came to another Place, some twenty five Leagues
from the River's Mouth on the same Side, where we found a Place,
no less delightful than the former; and as far as we could judge,
both Tracts came into one.  This lower Place we call'd Rocky Point,
because we found many Rocks and Stones, of several Sizes, upon the Land,
which is not common.  We sent our Boat down the River before us;
ourselves travelling by Land, many Miles.  Indeed we were so much taken
with the Pleasantness of the Country, that we travell'd into the Woods
too far to recover our Boat and Company that Night.  The next day
being Sunday, we got to our Boat; and on Monday the 16th of November,
proceeded down to a Place on the East-Side of the River,
some 23 Leagues from the Harbour's Mouth, which we call'd Turky-Quarters,
because we kill'd several Turkies thereabouts; we view'd the Land there,
and found some Tracts of good Ground, and high, facing upon the River
about one Mile inward, but backwards some two Miles, all Pine Land,
but good Pasture Ground:  We return'd to our Boat, and proceeded down
some 2 or 3 Leagues, where we had formerly view'd, and found it
a Tract of as good Land, as any we have seen, and had as good Timber on it.
The Banks on the River being high, therefore we call'd it High-Land-Point.
Having view'd that, we proceeded down the River, going on Shoar
in several Places on both Sides, it being generally large Marshes,
and many of them dry, that they may more fitly be call'd Meadows.
The Wood-Land against them is, for the most part, Pine,
and in some Places as barren, as ever we saw Land, but in other Places
good Pasture-Ground.  On Tuesday, November the 17th, we got aboard our Ship,
riding against the Mouth of Green's River, where our Men
were providing Wood, and fitting the Ship for the Sea:  In the interim,
we took a View of the Country on both sides of the River there,
finding some good Land, but more bad, and the best not comparable
to that above.  Friday the 20th was foul Weather; yet in the Afternoon
we weigh'd, went down the River about two Leagues, and came to an Anchor
against the Mouth of Hilton's River, and took a View of the Land there
on both sides, which appear'd to us much like that at Green's River.
Monday the 23d, we went, with our Long-Boat well victuall'd and mann'd,
up Hilton's River; and when we came three Leagues, or thereabouts,
up the same, we found this and Green's River to come into one,
and so continu'd for four or five Leagues, which makes a great Island
betwixt them.  We proceeded still up the River, till they parted again,
keeping up Hilton's River on the Larboard side, and follow'd the said River
five or six Leagues farther, where we found another large Branch
of Green's River to come into Hilton's, which makes another great Island.
On the Starboard side going up, we proceeded still up the River
some four Leagues, and return'd, taking a View of the Land on both sides,
and then judg'd ourselves to be from our Ship some 18 Leagues W. and by N.
One League below this Place, came four Indians in a Canoe to us,
and sold us several Baskets of Acorns, which we satisfy'd them for,
and so left them; but one of them follow'd us on the Shoar
some two or three Miles, till he came on the Top of a high Bank,
facing on the River; and as we row'd underneath it, the Fellow
shot an Arrow at us, which very narrowly miss'd one of our Men,
and stuck in the upper edge of the Boat; but broke in pieces,
leaving the Head behind.  Hereupon, we presently made to the Shoar,
and went all up the Bank (except Four to guide the Boat)
to look for the Indian, but could not find him:  At last,
we heard some sing, farther in the Woods, which we look'd upon
as a Challenge to us, to come and fight them.  We went towards them
with all Speed; but before we came in Sight of them, heard two Guns go off
from our Boat; whereupon we retreated, as fast as we could,
to secure our Boat and Men.  When we came to them, we found all well,
and demanded the Reason of their firing the Guns:  They told us,
that an Indian came creeping along the Bank, as they suppos'd,
to shoot at them; and therefore they shot at him at a great distance,
with small Shot, but thought they did him no Hurt; for they saw him run away.
Presently after our Return to the Boat, and while we were thus talking,
came two Indians to us, with their Bows and Arrows, crying `Bonny, Bonny'.
We took their Bows and Arrows from them, and gave them Beads,
to their Content; then we led them, by the Hand, to the Boat,
and shew'd them the Arrow-head sticking in her Side, and related to them
the whole Passage; which when they understood, both of them shew'd
a great Concern, and signify'd to us, by Signs, that they knew nothing of it;
so we let them go, and mark'd a Tree on the Top of the Bank,
calling the Place Mount-Skerry.  We look'd up the River,
as far as we could discern, and saw that it widen'd, and came running
directly down the Country:  So we return'd, viewing the Land
on both sides the River, and finding the Banks steep in some places,
but very high in others.  The Bank-sides are generally Clay,
and as some of our Company did affirm, some Marl.  The Land and Timber
up this River is no way inferiour to the best in the other, which we call
the main River.  So far as we could discern, this seem'd as fair,
if not fairer, than the former, and we think runs farther into the Country,
because a strong Current comes down, and a great deal more Drift-Wood.
But, to return to the Business of the Land and Timber:  We saw
several Plots of Ground clear'd by the Indians, after their weak manner,
compass'd round with great Timber Trees, which they are no-wise able to fell,
and so keep the Sun from Corn-Fields very much; yet nevertheless,
we saw as large Corn-stalks, or larger, than we have seen any where else:
So we proceeded down the River, till we found the Canoe the Indian was in,
who shot at us.  In the Morning, we went on Shoar, and cut the same in pieces.
The Indians perceiving us coming towards them, ran away.
Going to his Hutt, we pull'd it down, broke his Pots, Platters, and Spoons,
tore the Deer-Skins and Matts in pieces, and took away a Basket of Acorns;
and afterwards proceeded down the River 2 Leagues, or thereabouts,
and came to another Place of Indians, bought Acorns and some Corn of them,
and went downwards 2 Leagues more.  At last, espying an Indian
peeping over a high Bank, we held up a Gun at him; and calling to him,
`Skerry', presently several Indians came in Sight of us,
and made great Signs of Friendship, saying `Bonny, Bonny'.
Then running before us, they endeavour'd to persuade us to come on shoar;
but we answer'd them with stern Countenances, and call'd out, `Skerry',
taking up our Guns, and threatning to shoot at them,
but they still cry'd `Bonny, Bonny':  And when they saw
they could not prevail, nor persuade us to come on shoar,
two of them came off to us in a Canoe, one paddling with a great Cane,
the other with his Hand.  As soon as they overtook us,
they laid hold of our Boat, sweating and blowing, and told us,
it was `Bonny' on shoar, and at last persuaded us to go on shoar with them.
As soon as we landed, several Indians, to the Number of near 40 lusty Men,
came to us, all in a great Sweat, and told us `Bonny':
We shew'd 'em the Arrow-Head in the Boat-Side, and a Piece of the Canoe
we had cut in Pieces:  Whereupon, the chief Man amongst them
made a long Speech, threw Beads into our Boat, which is
a Sign of great Love and Friendship, and gave us to understand,
that when he heard of the Affront which we had receiv'd,
it caus'd him to cry; and that he and his Men were come
to make Peace with us, assuring us, by Signs, that they would tye the Arms,
and cut off the Head, of the Fellow who had done us that Wrong;
And for a farther Testimony of their Love and Good-Will towards us,
they presented us with two very handsome, proper, young Indian Women,
the tallest that ever we saw in this Country; which we suppos'd to be
the King's Daughters, or Persons of Distinction amongst them.
Those young Women were so ready to come into our Boat;
that one of them crowded in, and would hardly be persuaded to go out again.
We presented the King with a Hatchet and several Beads,
and made Presents of Beads also to the young Women, the chief Men,
and the rest of the Indians, as far as our Beads would go.
They promis'd us, in four Days, to come on board our Ship,
and so departed from us.  When we left the Place, which was soon after,
we call'd it Mount-Bonny, because we had there concluded a firm Peace.
Proceeding down the River 2 or 3 Leagues farther, we came to a Place
where were 9 or 10 Canoes all together.  We went ashoar there,
and found several Indians; but most of them were the same
which had made Peace with us before.  We staid very little at that Place,
but went directly down the River, and came to our Ship, before day.
Thursday the 26th of November, the Wind being at South,
we could not go down to the River's Mouth; but on Friday the 27th,
we weigh'd at the Mouth of Hilton's River, and got down
a League towards the Harbour's Mouth.  On Sunday the 29th,
we got down to Crane-Island, which is 4 Leagues or thereabouts,
above the Entrance of the Harbour's Mouth.  On Tuesday the 1st of December,
we made a Purchase of the River and Land of Cape-Fair, of Wat-Coosa,
and such other Indians, as appear'd to us to be the chief of those Parts.
They brought us Store of fresh Fish aboard, as Mullets, Shads,
and other sorts very good.  This River is all fresh Water, fit to drink.
Some 8 Leagues within the Mouth, the Tide runs up about 35 Leagues,
but stops and rises a great deal farther up.  It flows at the Harbour's Mouth,
S.E. and N.W. 6 Foot at Neap-Tides, and 8 Foot at Spring-Tides.
The Channel on the East side, by the Cape-Shoar, is the best,
and lies close aboard the Cape-Land, being 3 Fathoms at high Water,
in the shallowest Place in the Channel, just at the Entrance;
But as soon as you are past that Place, half a Cables Length inward,
you have 6 or 7 Fathoms, a fair turning Channel into the River,
and so continuing 5 or 6 Leagues upwards.  Afterwards the Channel
is more difficult, in some Places 6 or 7 Fathoms, in others 4 or 5,
and in others but 9 or 10 Foot, especially where the River is broad.
When the River comes to part, and grows narrow, there it is
all Channel from side to side, in most Places; tho' in some
you shall have 5, 6, or 7 Fathoms, but generally 2 or 3, Sand and Oaze.
We view'd the Cape-Land, and judg'd it to be little worth,
the Woods of it being shrubby and low, and the Land sandy and barren;
in some Places Grass and Rushes, in others nothing but clear Sand:
A Place fitter to starve Cattle, in our Judgment, than to keep 'em alive;
yet the Indians, as we understand, keep the English Cattle down there,
and suffer them not to go off of the said Cape, (as we suppose)
because the Country Indians shall have no Part with them;
and therefore 'tis likely, they have fallen out about them,
which shall have the greatest Share.  They brought on board our Ship
very good and fat Beef several times, which they sold us
at a very reasonable Price; also fat and very large Swine, good and cheap;
but they may thank their Friends of New-England, who brought their Hogs
to so fair a Market.  Some of the Indians brought very good Salt aboard us,
and made Signs, pointing to both sides of the River's Mouth,
that there was great Store thereabouts.  We saw up the River,
several good Places for the setting up of Corn or Saw-Mills.
In that time, as our Business call'd us up and down the River and Branches,
we kill'd of wild Fowl, 4 Swans, 10 Geese, 29 Cranes,
10 Turkies, 40 Ducks and Mallards, 3 dozen of Parrakeeto's,
and 6 dozen of other small Fowls, as Curlues and Plover, &c.

Whereas there was a Writing left in a Post, at the Point of Cape-Fair River,
by those New-England-Men, that left Cattle with the Indians there,
the Contents whereof tended not only to the Disparagement of the Land
about the said River, but also to the great Discouragement
of all such as should hereafter come into those Parts to settle:
In answer to that scandalous Writing, We, whose Names are underwritten,
do affirm, That we have seen, facing both sides the River and Branches
of Cape-Fair aforesaid, as good Land, and as well timber'd,
as any we have seen in any other Part of the World, sufficient to accommodate
Thousands of our English Nation, and lying commodiously
by the said River's Side.

On Friday the 4th of December, the Wind being fair, we put out to Sea,
bound for Barbados; and, on the 6th of February, 1664,
came to an Anchor in Carlisle-Bay; it having pleas'd God,
after several apparent Dangers both by Sea and Land, to bring us all in Safety
to our long-wish'd-for and much-desir'd Port, to render an Account
of our Discovery; the Verity of which we do assert.

                                   Anthony Long.
                                   William Hilton.
                                   Peter Fabian.


Thus you have an Account of the Latitude, Soil, and Advantages of Cape-Fair,
or Clarendon-River, which was settled in the Year 1661, or thereabouts;
and had it not been for the irregular Practices of some of that Colony
against the Indians, by sending away some of their Children,
(as I have been told) under Pretence of instructing 'em in Learning,
and the Principles of the Christian Religion; which so disgusted
the Indians, that tho' they had then no Guns, yet they never gave over,
till they had entirely rid themselves of the English,
by their Bows and Arrows; with which they did not only take off themselves,
but also their Stocks of Cattle; And this was so much the more
ruinous to them, in that they could have no Assistance from South-Carolina,
which was not then planted; and the other Plantations were but
in their Infancy.  Were it not for such ill Practices, I say,
it might, in all Probability, have been, at this day, the best Settlement
in their Lordships great Province of Carolina.

{Albemarl Sound and Rivers.}
The Sound of Albemarl, with the Rivers and Creeks of that Country,
afford a very rich and durable Soil.  The Land, in most Places,
lies indifferent low, (except in Chuwon, and high up the Rivers)
but bears an incredible Burden of Timber; the Low-Grounds being
cover'd with Beech; and the High-Land yielding lofty Oaks, Walnut-Trees,
and other useful Timber.  The Country, in some Plantations,
has yearly produc'd Indian Corn, or some other Grain, ever since
this Country was first seated, without the Trouble of Manuring or Dressing;
and yet (to all appearance) it seems not to be, in the least,
impoverish'd, neither do the Planters ever miss of a good Crop,
unless a very unnatural Season visits them, which seldom happens.



    Of the Corn of Carolina.


{Wheat.}
The Wheat of this Place is very good, seldom yielding less than thirty fold,
provided the Land is good where it is sown; Not but that there has been
Sixty-six Increase for one measure sown in Piny-Land, which we account
the meanest Sort.  And I have been inform'd, by People of Credit,
that Wheat which was planted in a very rich Piece of Land,
brought a hundred and odd Pecks, for one.  If our Planters,
when they found such great Increase, would be so curious as to make
nice Observations of the Soil, and other remarkable Accidents,
they would soon be acquainted with the Nature of the Earth and Climate,
and be better qualified to manage their Agriculture
to more Certainty, and greater Advantage; whereby they might arrive
to the Crops and Harvests of Babylon, and those other fruitful Countries
so much talk'd of.  For I must confess, I never saw one Acre of Land
manag'd as it ought to be in Carolina, since I knew it;
and were they as negligent in their Husbandry in Europe,
as they are in Carolina, their Land would produce nothing
but Weeds and Straw.

{Rye.}
They have try'd Rye, and it thrives very well; but having
such Plenty of Maiz, they do not regard it, because it makes black Bread,
unless very curiously handled.

{Barley.}
Barley has been sowed in small quantities, and does better
than can be expected; because that Grain requires the Ground
to be very well work'd with repeated Ploughings, which our general Way
of breaking the Earth with Hoes, can, by no means, perform,
tho' in several Places we have a light, rich, deep, black Mould,
which is the particular Soil in which Barley best thrives.

{Oats.}
The naked Oats thrive extraordinary well; and the other would prove
a very bold Grain; but the Plenty of other Grains makes them not much coveted.

{Maiz.}
The Indian Corn, or Maiz, proves the most useful Grain in the World;
and had it not been for the Fruitfulness of this Species,
it would have proved very difficult to have settled some of the Plantations
in America.  It is very nourishing, whether in Bread, sodden, or otherwise;
And those poor Christian Servants in Virginia, Maryland,
and the other northerly Plantations, that have been forced to live
wholly upon it, do manifestly prove, that it is the most nourishing Grain,
for a Man to subsist on, without any other Victuals.  And this Assertion
is made good by the Negro-Slaves, who, in many Places, eat nothing
but this Indian Corn and Salt.  Pigs and Poultry fed with this Grain,
eat the sweetest of all others.  It refuses no Grounds,
unless the barren Sands, and when planted in good Ground,
will repay the Planter seven or eight hundred fold; besides the Stalks
bruis'd and boil'd, make very pleasant Beer, being sweet like the Sugar-Cane.

{Rice.}
There are several sorts of Rice, some bearded, others not,
besides the red and white; But the white Rice is the best.
Yet there is a sort of perfum'd Rice in the East-Indies,
which gives a curious Flavour, in the Dressing.  And with this sort
America is not yet acquainted; neither can I learn, that any of it
has been brought over to Europe; the Rice of Carolina being esteem'd
the best that comes to that Quarter of the World.  It is of great Increase,
yielding from eight hundred to a thousand-fold, and thrives best in wild Land,
that has never been broken up before.

{Buck-Wheat.}
Buck-Wheat is of great Increase in Carolina; but we make no other use of it,
than instead of Maiz, to feed Hogs and Poultry:  {Guinea-Wheat.}
And Guinea Corn, which thrives well here, serves for the same use.

{Pulse.  Bushel-Bean.}
Of the Pulse-kind, we have many sorts.  The first is the Bushel-Bean,
which is a spontaneous Product.  They are so called, because they bring
a Bushel of Beans for one that is planted.  They are set in the Spring,
round Arbours, or at the Feet of Poles, up which they will climb,
and cover the Wattling, making a very pretty Shade to sit under.
They continue flowering, budding, and ripening all the Summer long,
till the Frost approaches, when they forbear their Fruit, and die.
The Stalks they grow on, come to the Thickness of a Man's Thumb;
and the Bean is white and mottled, with a purple Figure on each side it,
like an Ear.  They are very flat, and are eaten as the Windsor-Bean is,
being an extraordinary well-relish'd Pulse, either by themselves,
or with Meat.

{Indian Rouncevals.}
We have the Indian Rounceval, or Miraculous Pease, so call'd
from their long Pods, and great Increase.  These are latter Pease,
and require a pretty long Summer to ripen in.  {Pease and Beans.}
They are very good; and so are the Bonavis, Calavancies, Nanticokes,
and abundance of other Pulse, too tedious here to name,
which we found the Indians possess'd of, when first we settled in America;
some of which sorts afford us two Crops in one Year;
as the Bonavis and Calavancies, besides several others of that kind.

{Eng. Bean.}
Now I am launch'd into a Discourse of the Pulse, I must acquaint you,
that the European Bean planted here, will, in time, degenerate into
a dwarfish sort, if not prevented by a yearly Supply of foreign Seed,
and an extravagant rich Soil; yet these Pigmy-Beans are
the sweetest of that kind I ever met withal.

{Pease.}
As for all the sorts of English Pease that we have yet
made tryal of, they thrive very well in Carolina.  Particularly,
the white and gray Rouncival, the common Field-Pease,
and Sickle-Pease yield very well, and are of a good Relish.
As for the other sorts, I have not seen any made tryal of as yet,
but question not their coming to great Perfection with us.

{Kidney-Bean.}
The Kidney-Beans were here before the English came, being very plentiful
in the Indian Corn-Fields.

{Roots.}
The Garden-Roots that thrive well in Carolina, are Carrots, Leeks,
Parsnips, Turneps, Potatoes, of several delicate sorts, Ground Artichokes,
Radishes, Horse-Radish, Beet, both sorts, Onions, Shallot, Garlick, Cives,
and the Wild-Onions.

{Sallads.}
The Sallads are the Lettice, Curl'd, Red, Cabbage, and Savoy.
The Spinage round and prickly, Fennel, sweet and the common Sort,
Samphire in the Marshes excellent, so is the Dock or Wild-Rhubarb,
Rocket, Sorrel, French and English, Cresses of several Sorts,
Purslain wild, and that of a larger Size which grows in the Gardens;
{No Purslain in Indian Fields.} for this Plant is never met withal
in the Indian Plantations, and is, therefore, suppos'd to proceed
from Cow-Dung, which Beast they keep not.  Parsley two Sorts;
Asparagus thrives to a Miracle, without hot Beds or dunging the Land,
White-Cabbage from European or New-England Seed, for the People
are negligent and unskilful, and don't take care to provide Seed of their own.
The Colly-Flower we have not yet had an Opportunity to make Tryal of,
nor has the Artichoke ever appear'd amongst us, that I can learn.
Coleworts plain and curl'd, Savoys; besides the Water-Melons
of several Sorts, very good, which should have gone amongst the Fruits.
Of Musk-Melons we have very large and good, and several Sorts,
as the Golden, Green, Guinea, and Orange.  Cucumbers long, short,
and prickly, all these from the Natural Ground, and great Increase,
without any Helps of Dung or Reflection.  Pompions yellow and very large,
Burmillions, Cashaws, an excellent Fruit boil'd; Squashes, Simnals,
Horns, and Gourds; besides many other Species, of less Value,
too tedious to name.

{Pot-herbs, and others for Physick.}
Our Pot-herbs and others of use, which we already possess,
are Angelica wild and tame, Balm, Bugloss, Borage, Burnet,
Clary, Marigold, Pot-Marjoram, and other Marjorams, Summer and Winter Savory,
Columbines, Tansey, Wormwood, Nep, Mallows several Sorts, Drage red and white,
Lambs Quarters, Thyme, Hyssop of a very large Growth, sweet Bazil,
Rosemary, Lavender:  The more Physical, are Carduus Benedictus,
the Scurvy-grass of America, I never here met any of the European sort;
Tobacco of many sorts, Dill, Carawa, Cummin, Anise, Coriander,
all sorts of Plantain of England, and two sorts spontaneous,
good Vulneraries; Elecampane, Comfrey, Nettle, the Seed from England,
none Native; Monks Rhubarb, Burdock, Asarum wild in the Woods,
reckon'd one of the Snake-Roots; Poppies in the Garden,
none wild yet discover'd; Wormseed, Feverfew, Rue, Ground-Ivy spontaneous,
but very small and scarce, Aurea virga, {Rattle-Snakes.}
four sorts of Snake-Roots, besides the common Species,
which are great Antidotes against that Serpent's Bite, and are easily rais'd
in the Garden; Mint; {James-Town-Weed, the Seed like Onion Seed.}
James-Town-Weed, so called from Virginia, the Seed it bears
is very like that of an Onion; it is excellent for curing Burns,
and asswaging Inflammations, but taken inwardly brings on
a sort of drunken Madness.  One of our Marsh-Weeds, like a Dock,
has the same Effect, and possesses the Party with Fear and Watchings.
The Red-Root whose Leaf is like Spear-Mint, is good for
Thrushes and sore Mouths; Camomil, but it must be kept in the Shade,
otherwise it will not thrive; Housleek first from England;
Vervin; Night-Shade, several kinds; Harts-Tongue; Yarrow abundance,
Mullein the same, both of the Country; Sarsaparilla, and abundance more
I could name, yet not the hundredth part of what remains, a Catalogue of which
is a Work of many Years, and without any other Subject, would swell
to a large Volume, and requires the Abilities of a skilful Botanist:
Had not the ingenious Mr. Banister (the greatest Virtuoso we ever had
on the Continent) been unfortunately taken out of this World,
he would have given the best Account of the Plants of America,
of any that ever yet made such an Attempt in these Parts.
Not but we are satisfy'd, the Species of Vegetables in Carolina,
are so numerous, that it requires more than one Man's Age
to bring the chiefest Part of them into regular Classes;
the Country being so different in its Situation and Soil,
that what one place plentifully affords, another is absolutely a stranger to;
yet we generally observe, that the greatest Variety is found
in the Low Grounds, and Savanna's.

{Flowers.}
The Flower-Garden in Carolina is as yet arriv'd but to
a very poor and jejune Perfection.  We have only two sorts of Roses;
the Clove-July-Flowers, Violets, Princes Feather, and Tres Colores.
There has been nothing more cultivated in the Flower-Garden,
which, at present, occurs to my Memory; but as for the wild
spontaneous Flowers of this Country, Nature has been so liberal,
that I cannot name one tenth part of the valuable ones; And since,
to give Specimens, would only swell the Volume, and give little Satisfaction
to the Reader, I shall therefore proceed to the Present State of Carolina,
and refer the Shrubs and other Vegetables of larger Growth, till hereafter,
and then shall deliver them and the other Species in their Order.



    The Present State of Carolina.


When we consider the Latitude and convenient Situation of Carolina,
had we no farther Confirmation thereof, our Reason would inform us,
that such a Place lay fairly to be a delicious Country,
being placed in that Girdle of the World which affords Wine, Oil, Fruit,
Grain, and Silk, with other rich Commodities, besides a sweet Air,
moderate Climate, and fertile Soil; these are the Blessings
(under Heaven's Protection) that spin out the Thread of Life
to its utmost Extent, and crown our Days with the Sweets of Health and Plenty,
which, when join'd with Content, renders the Possessors
the happiest Race of Men upon Earth.

{The Present State of Carolina.}
The Inhabitants of Carolina, thro' the Richness of the Soil,
live an easy and pleasant Life.  The Land being of several sorts of Compost,
some stiff, others light, some marl, others rich black Mould;
here barren of Pine, but affording Pitch, Tar, and Masts;
there vastly rich, especially on the Freshes of the Rivers,
one part bearing great Timbers, others being Savanna's or natural Meads,
where no Trees grow for several Miles, adorn'd by Nature
with a pleasant Verdure, and beautiful Flowers, frequent in no other Places,
yielding abundance of Herbage for Cattle, Sheep, and Horse.
The Country in general affords pleasant Seats, the Land
(except in some few Places) being dry and high Banks, {Necks of Land.}
parcell'd out into most convenient Necks, (by the Creeks)
easy to be fenced in for securing their Stocks to more strict Boundaries,
whereby, with a small trouble of fencing, almost every Man
may enjoy, to himself, an entire Plantation, or rather Park.
These, with the other Benefits of Plenty of Fish, Wild-Fowl, Venison,
and the other Conveniencies which this Summer-Country naturally furnishes,
has induc'd a great many Families to leave the more Northerly Plantations,
and sit down under one of the mildest Governments in the World;
in a Country that, with moderate Industry, will afford all
the Necessaries of Life.  We have yearly abundance of Strangers
come among us, who chiefly strive to go Southerly to settle,
because there is a vast Tract of rich Land betwixt the Place we are seated in,
and Cape-Fair, and upon that River, and more Southerly,
which is inhabited by none but a few Indians, who are at this time
well affected to the English, and very desirous of their coming
to live among them.  {Purchase of Land.}  The more Southerly,
the milder Winters, with the Advantages of purchasing the Lords Land
at the most easy and moderate Rate of any Lands in America,
nay (allowing all Advantages thereto annex'd) I may say,
the Universe does not afford such another; Besides, Men have
a great Advantage of choosing good and commodious Tracts of Land
at the first Seating of a Country or River, whereas the later Settlers
are forced to purchase smaller Dividends of the old Standers,
and sometimes at very considerable Rates; {Land in Virginia and Maryland.}
as now in Virginia and Maryland, where a thousand Acres of good Land
cannot be bought under twenty Shillings an Acre, besides two Shillings
yearly Acknowledgment for every hundred Acres; which Sum,
be it more or less, will serve to put the Merchant or Planter here
into a good posture of Buildings, Slaves, and other Necessaries,
when the Purchase of his Land comes to him on such easy Terms.
{Stocks Increase.}  And as our Grain and Pulse thrives with us to admiration,
no less do our Stocks of Cattle, Horses, Sheep, and Swine multiply.

{Beef.}
The Beef of Carolina equalizes the best that our neighbouring
Colonies afford; the Oxen are of a great size when they are suffer'd to live
to a fit Age.  I have seen fat and good Beef at all times of the Year,
but October and the cool Months are the Seasons we kill our Beeves in,
when we intend them for Salting or Exportation; for then they are in
their prime of Flesh, all coming from Grass, we never using
any other Food for our Cattle.  {Heifers.}  The Heifers bring Calves
at eighteen or twenty Months old, which makes such a wonderful Increase,
that many of our Planters, from very mean Beginnings, have rais'd themselves,
and are now Masters of hundreds of fat Beeves, and other Cattle.

{Veal.}
The Veal is very good and white, so is the Milk very pleasant and rich,
there being, at present, considerable Quantities of Butter and Cheese made,
that is very good, not only serving our own Necessities,
but we send out a great deal among our Neighbours.

{Sheep.}
The Sheep thrive very well at present, having most commonly two Lambs
at one yeaning:  As the Country comes to be open'd, they prove still better,
Change of Pasture being agreeable to that useful Creature.
Mutton is (generally) exceeding Fat, and of a good Relish;
their Wool is very fine, and proves a good Staple.

{Horses.}
The Horses are well-shap'd and swift; the best of them would sell
for ten or twelve Pounds in England.  They prove excellent Drudges,
and will travel incredible Journeys.  They are troubled with
very few Distempers, neither do the cloudy-fac'd grey Horses go blind here,
as in Europe.  As for Spavins, Splints, and Ring-Bones,
they are here never met withal, as I can learn.  Were we to have
our Stallions and choice of Mares from England, or any other of a good Sort,
and careful to keep them on the Highlands, we could not fail
of a good Breed; but having been supply'd with our first Horses
from the neighbouring Plantations, which were but mean,
they do not as yet come up to the Excellency of the English Horses;
tho' we generally find, that the Colt exceeds, in Beauty and Strength,
its Sire and Dam.

{Swine.}
The Pork exceeds any in Europe; the great Diversity and Goodness
of the Acorns and Nuts which the Woods afford, making that Flesh
of an excellent Taste, and produces great Quantities; so that Carolina
(if not the chief) is not inferior, in this one Commodity, to any Colony
in the hands of the English.

{Goats.}
As for Goats, they have been found to thrive and increase well,
but being mischievous to Orchards and other Trees, makes People decline
keeping them.

{Produce.}
Our Produce for Exportation to Europe and the Islands in America,
are Beef, Pork, Tallow, Hides, Deer-Skins, Furs, Pitch, Tar,
Wheat, Indian-Corn, Pease, Masts, Staves, Heading, Boards,
and all sorts of Timber and Lumber for Madera and the West-Indies;
Rozin, Turpentine, and several sorts of Gums and Tears,
with some medicinal Drugs, are here produc'd; Besides Rice, and several other
foreign Grains, which thrive very well.  Good Bricks and Tiles are made,
and several sorts of useful Earths, as Bole, Fullers-Earth, Oaker,
and Tobacco-pipe-Clay, in great plenty; Earths for the Potters Trade,
and fine Sand for the Glass-makers.  In building with Bricks,
we make our Lime of Oyster-Shells, tho' we have great Store of Lime-stone,
towards the Heads of our Rivers, where are Stones of all sorts
that are useful, besides vast Quantities of excellent Marble.
Iron-Stone we have plenty of, both in the Low-Grounds and on the Hills;
Lead and Copper has been found, so has Antimony heretofore;
But no Endeavours have been us'd to discover those Subteraneous Species;
otherwise we might, in all probability, find out the best of Minerals,
which are not wanting in Carolina.  Hot Baths we have an account of
from the Indians that frequent the Hill-Country, {Salt-peter.}
where a great likelihood appears of making Salt-peter, because the Earth,
in many places, is strongly mix'd with a nitrous Salt, which is much coveted
by the Beasts, who come at some Seasons in great Droves and Herds,
and by their much licking of this Earth, make great Holes in those Banks,
which sometimes lie at the heads of great Precipices, where their Eagerness
after this Salt hastens their End, by falling down the high Banks,
so that they are dash'd in Pieces.  It must be confess'd,
that the most noble and sweetest Part of this Country, is not inhabited
by any but the Savages; and a great deal of the richest Part thereof,
has no Inhabitants but the Beasts of the Wilderness:
For, the Indians are not inclinable to settle in the richest Land,
because the Timbers are too large for them to cut down,
and too much burthen'd with Wood for their Labourers to make Plantations of;
besides, the Healthfulness of those Hills is apparent,
by the Gigantick Stature, and Gray-Heads, so common amongst the Savages
that dwell near the Mountains.  The great Creator of all things,
having most wisely diffus'd his Blessings, by parcelling out
the Vintages of the World, into such Lots, as his wonderful Foresight saw
most proper, requisite, and convenient for the Habitations of his Creatures.
Towards the Sea, we have the Conveniency of Trade, Transportation,
and other Helps the Water affords; but oftentimes, those Advantages
are attended with indifferent Land, a thick Air, and other Inconveniences;
when backwards, near the Mountains, you meet with the richest Soil,
a sweet, thin Air, dry Roads, pleasant small murmuring Streams,
and several beneficial Productions and Species, which are unknown
in the European World.  One Part of this Country affords
what the other is wholly a Stranger to.

{Chalybeate Waters.}
We have Chalybeate Waters of several Tastes and different Qualities;
some purge, others work by the other Emunctories.  We have,
amongst the Inhabitants, a Water, that is, inwardly, a great Apersive,
and, outwardly, cures Ulcers, Tettars, and Sores, by washing therewith.

{Coal-Mine in Virginia.}
There has been a Coal-Mine lately found near the Mannakin Town,
above the Falls of James-River in Virginia, which proves
very good, and is us'd by the Smiths, for their Forges;
and we need not doubt of the same amongst us, towards the Heads of our Rivers;
but the Plenty of Wood (which is much the better Fuel)
makes us not inquisitive after Coal-Mines.  {French Refugees.}
Most of the French, who lived at that Town on James-River, are remov'd
to Trent-River, in North-Carolina, where the rest were expected daily
to come to them, when I came away, which was in August, 1708.
They are much taken with the Pleasantness of that Country,
and, indeed, are a very industrious People.  At present, they make
very good Linnen-Cloath and Thread, and are very well vers'd in cultivating
Hemp and Flax, of both which they raise very considerable Quantities;
and design to try an Essay of the Grape, for making of Wine.

{Planters.}
As for those of our own Country in Carolina, some of the Men
are very laborious, and make great Improvements in their Way;
but I dare hardly give 'em that Character in general.  The easy Way of living
in that plentiful Country, makes a great many Planters very negligent,
which, were they otherwise, that Colony might now have been
in a far better Condition than it is, (as to Trade, and other Advantages)
which an universal Industry would have led them into.

{Women good Houswives.}
The Women are the most industrious Sex in that Place, and,
by their good Houswifry, make a great deal of Cloath of their own Cotton,
Wool and Flax; some of them keeping their Families (though large)
very decently apparel'd, both with Linnens and Woollens,
so that they have no occasion to run into the Merchant's Debt,
or lay their Money out on Stores for Cloathing.

{Natives of Carolina.}
The Christian Natives of Carolina are a straight, clean-limb'd People;
the Children being seldom or never troubled with Rickets,
or those other Distempers, that the Europeans are visited withal.
'Tis next to a Miracle, to see one of them deform'd in Body.
The Vicinity of the Sun makes Impression on the Men, who labour
out of doors, or use the Water.  {Beautiful.}  As for those Women,
that do not expose themselves to the Weather, they are often very fair,
and generally as well featur'd, as you shall see any where,
and have very brisk charming Eyes, which sets them off to Advantage.
They marry very young; some at Thirteen or Fourteen; and She that stays
till Twenty, is reckon'd a stale Maid; which is a very indifferent Character
in that warm Country.  The Women are very fruitful; most Houses
being full of Little Ones.  It has been observ'd, that Women long marry'd,
and without Children, in other Places, have remov'd to Carolina,
and become joyful Mothers.  They have very easy Travail
in their Child-bearing, in which they are so happy, as seldom to miscarry.
{Not Passionate.}  Both Sexes are generally spare of Body,
and not Cholerick, nor easily cast down at Disappointments and Losses,
seldom immoderately grieving at Misfortunes, unless for
the Loss of their nearest Relations and Friends, which seems to make
a more than ordinary Impression upon them.  Many of the Women
are very handy in Canoes, and will manage them with great Dexterity and Skill,
which they become accustomed to in this watry Country.  {Good Wives.}
They are ready to help their Husbands in any servile Work, as Planting,
when the Season of the Weather requires Expedition; Pride seldom banishing
good Houswifry.  The Girls are not bred up to the Wheel, and Sewing only;
but the Dairy and Affairs of the House they are very well acquainted withal;
so that you shall see them, whilst very young, manage their Business
with a great deal of Conduct and Alacrity.  {Natives are docile.}
The Children of both Sexes are very docile, and learn any thing
with a great deal of Ease and Method; and those that have
the Advantages of Education, write good Hands, and prove good Accountants,
which is most coveted, and indeed most necessary in these Parts.
The young Men are commonly of a bashful, sober Behaviour; {No Prodigals.}
few proving Prodigals, to consume what the Industry of their Parents
has left them, but commonly improve it.  The marrying so young,
carries a double Advantage with it, and that is, that the Parents see
their Children provided for in Marriage, and the young married People
are taught by their Parents, how to get their Living; for their Admonitions
make great Impressions on their Children.  {Great Age of Americans.}
I had heard (before I knew this new World) that the Natives of America
were a short-liv'd People, which, by all the Observations I could ever make,
proves quite contrary; for those who are born here, and in other Colonies,
live to as great Ages as any of the Europeans, the Climate being free
from Consumptions, which Distemper, fatal to England, they are Strangers to.
And as the Country becomes more clear'd of Wood, it still becomes
more healthful to the Inhabitants, and less addicted to the Ague;
which is incident to most new Comers into America from Europe,
yet not mortal.  A gentle Emetick seldom misses of driving it away,
but if it is not too troublesome, 'tis better to let the Seasoning have
its own Course, in which case, the Party is commonly free from it ever after,
and very healthful.

And now, as to the other Advantages the Country affords,
we cannot guess at them at present, because, as I said before,
the best Part of this Country is not inhabited by the English,
from whence probably will hereafter spring Productions that this Age
does not dream of, and of much more Advantage to the Inhabitants
than any things we are yet acquainted withal:  And as for
several Productions of other Countries, much in the same Latitude,
we may expect, with good Management, they will become familiar to us,
as Wine, Oil, Fruit, Silk, and other profitable Commodities,
such as Drugs, Dyes, &c.  And at present the Curious may have
a large Field to satisfy and divert themselves in, {Collections.}
as Collections of strange Beasts, Birds, Insects, Reptiles,
Shells, Fishes, Minerals, Herbs, Flowers, Plants, Shrubs, intricate Roots,
Gums, Tears, Rozins, Dyes, and Stones, with several other that yield
Satisfaction and Profit to those, whose Inclinations tend that Way.
And as for what may be hop'd for, towards a happy Life and Being,
by such as design to remove thither, I shall add this;
That with prudent Management, I can affirm, by Experience, not by Hear-say,
That any Person, with a small Beginning, may live very comfortably,
and not only provide for the Necessaries of Life, but likewise for those
that are to succeed him; {Provisions very cheap.} Provisions being
very plentiful, and of good Variety, to accommodate genteel House-keeping;
and the neighbouring Indians are friendly, and in many Cases
serviceable to us, in making us Wares to catch Fish in, for a small matter,
which proves of great Advantage to large Families, because those Engines take
great Quantities of many Sorts of Fish, that are very good and nourishing:
{Indians Hunters.}  Some of them hunt and fowl for us at reasonable Rates,
the Country being as plentifully provided with all Sorts of Game,
as any Part of America; the poorer Sort of Planters often get them
to plant for them, by hiring them for that Season, or for so much Work,
which commonly comes very reasonable.  Moreover, it is remarkable,
That no Place on the Continent of America, has seated an English Colony
so free from Blood-shed, as Carolina; but all the others have been
more damag'd and disturb'd by the Indians, than they have;
which is worthy Notice, when we consider how oddly it was first planted
with Inhabitants.

{Fishing-Trade.}
The Fishing-Trade in Carolina might be carried on to great Advantage,
considering how many Sorts of excellent Fish our Sound and Rivers afford,
which cure very well with Salt, as has been experienced
by some small Quantities, which have been sent abroad,
and yielded a good Price.  {Whale-Fishing.}  As for the Whale-fishing,
it is no otherwise regarded than by a few People who live on the Sand-Banks;
and those only work on dead Fish cast on shoar, none being struck
on our Coast, as they are to the Northward; altho' we have
Plenty of Whales there.  Great Plenty is generally the Ruin of Industry.
Thus our Merchants are not many, nor have those few there be,
apply'd themselves to the European Trade.  The Planter sits contented
at home, whilst his Oxen thrive and grow fat, and his Stocks daily increase;
The fatted Porkets and Poultry are easily rais'd to his Table,
and his Orchard affords him Liquor, so that he eats, and drinks away
the Cares of the World, and desires no greater Happiness,
than that which he daily enjoys.  Whereas, not only the European,
but also the Indian-Trade, might be carried on to a great Profit,
because we lie as fairly for the Body of Indians, as any Settlement
in English-America; {Indian-Trade.} And for the small Trade
that has been carried on in that Way, the Dealers therein have throve
as fast as any Men, and the soonest rais'd themselves of any People
I have known in Carolina.

{Climate.}
Lastly, As to the Climate, it is very healthful; {Summer.} our Summer
is not so hot as in other places to the Eastward in the same Latitude;
{No Earthquakes.} neither are we ever visited by Earthquakes, as many places
in Italy and other Summer-Countries are.  Our Northerly Winds, in Summer,
cool the Air, and free us from pestilential Fevers, which Spain, Barbary,
and the neighbouring Countries in Europe, &c. are visited withal.
{Serene.}  Our Sky is generally serene and clear, and the Air very thin,
in comparison of many Parts of Europe, where Consumptions and Catarrhs reign
amongst the Inhabitants.  The Winter has several Fitts of sharp Weather,
especially when the Wind is at N.W. which always clears the Sky,
though never so thick before.  However, such Weather is very agreeable
to European Bodies, and makes them healthy.  The N.E. Winds
blowing in Winter, bring with them thick Weather, and, in the Spring,
sometimes, blight the Fruits; but they very seldom endure long,
being blown away by Westerly Winds, and then all becomes fair and clear again.
{Spring.}  Our Spring, in Carolina, is very beautiful,
and the most pleasant Weather a Country can enjoy.  {Fall.}
The Fall is accompanied with cool Mornings, which come in
towards the latter end of August, and so continue (most commonly)
very moderate Weather till about Christmas; then Winter comes on apace.
Tho' these Seasons are very piercing, yet the Cold is of no continuance.
Perhaps, you will have cold Weather for three or four days at a time;
then pleasant warm Weather follows, such as you have in England,
about the latter end of April or beginning of May.  In the Year 1707,
we had the severest Winter in Carolina, that ever was known
since the English came to settle there; for our Rivers,
that were not above half a Mile wide, and fresh Water, were frozen over;
and some of them, in the North-part of this Country, were passable
for People to walk over.

{No Frontier.}
One great Advantage of North-Carolina is, That we are not a Frontier,
and near the Enemy; which proves very chargeable and troublesome,
in time of War, to those Colonies that are so seated.  {Near Virginia.}
Another great Advantage comes from its being near Virginia,
where we come often to a good Market, at the Return of the Guinea-Ships
for Negro's, and the Remnant of their Stores, which is very commodious
for the Indian-Trade; besides, in War-time, we lie near at hand
to go under their Convoy, and to sell our Provisions to the Tobacco-fleets;
{Mariland.} for the Planting of Tobacco generally in those Colonies,
prevents their being supplyed with Stores, sufficient for victualling
their Ships.

{Necessaries for Carolina.}
As for the Commodities, which are necessary to carry over to this Plantation,
for Use and Merchandize, and are, therefore, requisite for those
to have along with them, that intend to transport themselves thither,
they are Guns, Powder and Shot, Flints, Linnens of all sorts,
but chiefly ordinary Blues, Osnabrugs, Scotch and Irish Linnen,
and some fine:  Mens and Womens Cloaths ready made up, some few Broad-Cloaths,
Kerseys and Druggets; to which you must add Haberdashers-Wares,
Hats about Five or Six Shillings apiece, and a few finer;
a few Wiggs, not long, and pretty thin of Hair; thin Stuffs for Women;
Iron-Work, as Nails, Spades, Axes, broad and narrow Hoes, Frows, Wedges,
and Saws of all sorts, with other Tools for Carpenters, Joiners, Coopers,
Shoemakers, Shave-locks, &c. all which, and others which are necessary
for the Plantations, you may be inform'd of, and buy at very reasonable Rates,
of Mr. James Gilbert, Ironmonger, in Mitre-Tavern-Yard, near Aldgate.
You may also be used very kindly, for your Cuttlery-Ware,
and other advantageous Merchandizes, and your Cargo's well sorted,
by Capt. Sharp, at the Blue-gate in Cannon-street; and for Earthen-Ware,
Window-Glass, Grind-Stones, Mill-Stones, Paper, Ink-Powder,
Saddles, Bridles, and what other things you are minded to take with you,
for Pleasure or Ornament.

And now, I shall proceed to the rest of the Vegetables,
that are common in Carolina, in reference to the Place where I left off,
which is the Natural History of that Country.



[The Natural History of Carolina.]



    Of the Vegetables of Carolina.


The spontaneous Shrubs of this Country, are, the Lark-heel-Tree;
three sorts of Hony-Suckle-Tree, the first of which grows in Branches,
as our Piemento-Tree does, that is, always in low, moist Ground;
the other grows in clear, dry Land, the Flower more cut and lacerated;
the third, which is the most beautiful, and, I think,
the most charming Flower of its Colour, I ever saw, grows betwixt
two and three Foot high, and for the most part, by the side of a swampy Wood,
or on the Banks of our Rivers, but never near the Salt-Water.  All the Sorts
are white; the last grows in a great Bunch of these small Hony-Suckles
set upon one chief Stem, and is commonly the Bigness of a large Turnep.
Nothing can appear more beautiful than these Bushes, when in their Splendour,
which is in April and May.  The next is the Honey-Suckle of the Forest;
it grows about a Foot high, bearing its Flowers on small Pedestals,
several of them standing on the main Stock, which is the Thickness
of a Wheat-Straw.  We have also the Wood-bind, much the same as in England;
Princes-feather, very large and beautiful in the Garden; Tres-Colores,
branch'd Sun-flower, Double Poppies, Lupines, of several pretty sorts,
spontaneous; and the Sensible Plant is said to be near the Mountains,
which I have not yet seen.  Saf-Flower; (and I believe,
the Saffron of England would thrive here, if planted) the yellow Jessamin
is wild in our Woods, of a pleasant Smell.  Ever-Greens are here
plentifully found, of a very quick Growth, and pleasant Shade;
Cypress, or white Cedar, the Pitch Pine, the yellow Pine,
the white Pine with long Leaves; and the smaller Almond-Pine, which last
bears Kernels in the Apple, tasting much like an Almond; and in some years
there falls such plenty, as to make the Hogs fat.  Horn-Beam; Cedar,
two sorts; Holly, two sorts; Bay-Tree, two sorts; one the Dwarf-Bay,
about twelve Foot high; the other the Bigness of a middling Pine-Tree,
about two Foot and half Diameter; Laurel-Trees, in Height equalizing
the lofty Oaks; the Berries and Leaves of this Tree dyes a Yellow;
the Bay-Berries yield a Wax, which besides its Use in Chirurgery,
makes Candles that, in burning, give a fragrant Smell.
The Cedar-Berries are infused, and made Beer of, by the Bermudians,
they are Carminative, and much of the Quality of Juniper-Berries;
Yew and Box I never saw or heard of in this Country:  There are
two sorts of Myrtles, different in Leaf and Berry; the Berry yields Wax
that makes Candles, the most lasting, and of the sweetest Smell imaginable.
Some mix half Tallow with this Wax, others use it without Mixture;
and these are fit for a Lady's Chamber, and incomparable
to pass the Line withal, and other hot Countries, because they will stand,
when others will melt, by the excessive Heat, down in the Binacles.
Ever-green Oak, two sorts; Gall-Berry-Tree, bearing a black Berry,
with which the Women dye their Cloaths and Yarn black;
'tis a pretty Ever-green, and very plentiful, growing always
in low swampy Grounds, and amongst Ponds.  We have a Prim or Privet,
which grows on the dry, barren, sandy Hills, by the Sound side;
it bears a smaller sort than that in England, and grows into a round Bush,
very beautiful.  {Yaupon.}  Last of Bushes, (except Savine,
which grows every where wild) is the famous Yaupon, of which I find
two sorts, if not three.  I shall speak first of the Nature of this Plant,
and afterwards account for the different Sorts.  This Yaupon,
call'd by the South-Carolina Indians, Cassena, is a Bush,
that grows chiefly on the Sand-Banks and Islands, bordering on
the Sea of Carolina; on this Coast it is plentifully found,
and in no other Place that I know of.  It grows the most like Box,
of any Vegetable that I know, being very like it in Leaf,
only dented exactly like Tea, but the Leaf somewhat fatter.
I cannot say, whether it bears any Flower, but a Berry it does,
about the Bigness of a Grain of Pepper, being first red, then brown when ripe,
which is in December; Some of these Bushes grow to be twelve Foot high,
others are three or four.  The Wood thereof is brittle as Myrtle,
and affords a light ash-colour'd Bark.  There is sometimes found of it
in Swamps and rich low Grounds, which has the same figured Leaf,
only it is larger, and of a deeper Green; This may be occasion'd
by the Richness that attends the low Grounds thus situated.
The third Sort has the same kind of Leaf, but never grows a Foot high,
and is found both in rich, low Land, and on the Sand-Hills.
I don't know that ever I found any Seed, or Berries on the dwarfish Sort,
yet I find no Difference in Taste, when Infusion is made:  Cattle and Sheep
delight in this Plant very much, and so do the Deer, all which
crop it very short, and browze thereon, wheresoever they meet with it.
I have transplanted the Sand-Bank and dwarfish Yaupon,
and find that the first Year, the Shrubs stood at a stand;
but the second Year they throve as well as in their native Soil.
This Plant is the Indian Tea, us'd and approv'd by all the Savages
on the Coast of Carolina, and from them sent to the Westward Indians,
and sold at a considerable Price.  {Curing the Yaupon.}
All which they cure after the same way, as they do for themselves;
which is thus:  They take this Plant (not only the Leaves,
but the smaller Twigs along with them) and bruise it in a Mortar,
till it becomes blackish, the Leaf being wholly defaced:
Then they take it out, put it into one of their earthen Pots
which is over the Fire, till it smoaks; stirring it all the time,
till it is cur'd.  Others take it, after it is bruis'd,
and put it into a Bowl, to which they put live Coals, and cover them
with the Yaupon, till they have done smoaking, often turning them over.
After all, they spread it upon their Mats, and dry it in the Sun
to keep for Use.  The Spaniards in New-Spain have this Plant
very plentifully on the Coast of Florida, and hold it in great Esteem.
Sometimes they cure it as the Indians do; or else beat it to a Powder,
so mix it, as Coffee; yet before they drink it, they filter the same.
They prefer it above all Liquids, to drink with Physick, to carry the same
safely and speedily thro' the Passages, for which it is admirable,
as I myself have experimented.

{Timber.}
In the next Place, I shall speak of the Timber that Carolina affords,
which is as follows.

{Chesnut-Oak.}
Chesnut-Oak, is a very lofty Tree, clear of Boughs and Limbs,
for fifty or 60 Foot.  They bear sometimes four or five Foot through
all clear Timber; and are the largest Oaks we have,
yielding the fairest Plank.  They grow chiefly in low Land,
that is stiff and rich.  I have seen of them so high,
that a good Gun could not reach a Turkey, tho' loaded with Swan-Shot.
They are call'd Chesnut, because of the Largeness and Sweetness of the Acorns.

{Scaly Oaks.}
White, Scaly-bark Oak; This is used, as the former, in building
Sloops and Ships.  Tho' it bears a large Acorn, yet it never grows
to the Bulk and Height of the Chesnut Oak.  It is so call'd,
because of a scaly, broken, white Bark, that covers this Tree,
growing on dry Land.

{Red Oak.}
We have Red Oak, sometimes, in good Land, very large, and lofty.
'Tis a porous Wood, and used to rive into Rails for Fences.
'Tis not very durable; yet some use this, as well as the two former,
for Pipe and Barrel-Staves.  It makes good Clap-boards.

{Spanish Oak.}
Spanish Oak is free to rive, bears a whitish, smooth Bark;
and rives very well into Clap-boards.  It is accounted durable,
therefore some use to build Vessels with it for the Sea;
it proving well and durable.  These all bear good Mast for the Swine.

{Bastard Spanish.}
Bastard-Spanish is an Oak betwixt the Spanish and Red Oak;
the chief Use is for Fencing and Clap-boards.  It bears good Acorns.

{Black Oak.}
The next is Black Oak, which is esteem'd a durable Wood, under Water;
but sometimes it is used in House-work.  It bears a good Mast for Hogs.

{White Iron.}
White Iron, or Ring-Oak, is so call'd, from the Durability and lasting Quality
of this Wood.  It chiefly grows on dry, lean Land, and seldom fails of bearing
a plentiful Crop of Acorns.  This Wood is found to be very durable,
and is esteem'd the best Oak for Ship-work that we have in Carolina;
for tho' Live Oak be more lasting, yet it seldom allows Planks
of any considerable Length.

{Turkey Oak.}
Turkey-Oak is so call'd from a small Acorn it bears, which the wild Turkeys
feed on.

{Live Oak.}
Live-Oak chiefly grows on dry, sandy Knolls.  This is an Ever-green,
and the most durable Oak all America affords.  The Shortness
of this Wood's Bowl, or Trunk, makes it unfit for Plank to build Ships withal.
There are some few Trees, that would allow a Stock of twelve Foot,
but the Firmness and great Weight thereof, frightens our Sawyers
from the Fatigue that attends the cutting of this Timber.
A Nail once driven therein, 'tis next to an Impossibility to draw it out.
The Limbs thereof are so cur'd, that they serve for excellent Timbers,
Knees, &c. for Vessels of any sort.  The Acorns thereof are as sweet
as Chesnuts, and the Indians draw an Oil from them, as sweet as that
from the Olive, tho' of an Amber-Colour.  With these Nuts, or Acorns,
some have counterfeited the Cocoa, whereof they have made Chocolate,
not to be distinguish'd by a good Palate.  Window-Frames, Mallets,
and Pins for Blocks, are made thereof, to an excellent Purpose.
I knew two Trees of this Wood among the Indians, which were planted
from the Acorn, and grew in the Freshes, and never saw any thing
more beautiful of that kind.  They are of an indifferent quick Growth;
of which there are two sorts.  The Acorns make very fine Pork.

{Willow Oak.}
Willow-Oak is a sort of Water-Oak.  It grows in Ponds and Branches,
and is useful for many things.  It is so call'd, from the Leaf,
which very much resembles a Willow.

{Fresh-water Oak.}
The Live Oak grows in the fresh Water Ponds and Swamps, by the River sides,
and in low Ground overflown with Water; and is a perennial Green.

{Ash.}
Of Ash we have two sorts, agreeing nearly with the English in the Grain.
One of our sorts is tough, like the English, but differs something
in the Leaf, and much more in the Bark.  Neither of them bears Keys.
The Water-Ash is brittle.  The Bark is Food for the Bevers.

{Elm.}
There are two sorts of Elm; the first grows on our High-Land,
and approaches our English.  The Indians take the Bark of its Root,
and beat it, whilst green, to a Pulp; and then dry it in the Chimney,
where it becomes of a reddish Colour.  This they use as a Sovereign Remedy
to heal a Cut or green Wound, or any thing that is not corrupted.
It is of a very glutinous Quality.  The other Elm grows in low Ground,
of whose Bark the English and Indians make Ropes; for as soon
as the Sap rises, it strips off, with the greatest ease imaginable.
It runs in March, or thereabouts.

{Tulip-Tree.}
The Tulip-Trees, which are, by the Planters, call'd Poplars,
as nearest approaching that Wood in Grain, grow to a prodigious Bigness,
some of them having been found One and twenty Foot in Circumference.
I have been inform'd of a Tulip-Tree, that was ten Foot Diameter;
and another, wherein a lusty Man had his Bed and Houshold Furniture,
and liv'd in it, till his Labour got him a more fashionable Mansion.
He afterwards became a noted Man, in his Country, for Wealth and Conduct.
One of these sorts bears a white Tulip; the other a party-colour'd,
mottled one.  The Wood makes very pretty Wainscot, Shingles for Houses,
and Planks for several Uses.  It is reckon'd very lasting;
especially, under Ground, for Mill-Work.  The Buds, made into an Ointment,
cure Scalds, Inflammations, and Burns.  I saw several Bushels thereon.
The Cattle are apt to eat of these Buds, which give a very odd Taste
to the Milk.

{Beech.}
Beech is here frequent, and very large.  The Grain seems exactly the same
as that in Europe.  We make little Use thereof, save for Fire-Wood.
'Tis not a durable Timber.  It affords a very sweet Nut,
yet the Pork fed thereon (tho' sweet) is very oily, and ought to be
harden'd with Indian Corn, before it is kill'd.  {Buck Beech.}
Another sort call'd Buck-Beech is here found.

{Horn-Beam.}
Horn-Beam grows, in some Places, very plentifully; yet the Plenty
of other Wood makes it unregarded.

{Sassafras.}
The Vertues of Sassafras are well known in Europe.  This Wood
sometimes grows to be above two Foot over, and is very durable and lasting,
used for Bowls, Timbers, Posts for Houses, and other Things that require
standing in the Ground.  'Tis very light.  It bears a white Flower,
which is very cleansing to the Blood, being eaten in the Spring,
with other Sallating.  The Berry, when ripe, is black; 'tis very oily,
Carminative, and extremely prevalent in Clysters for the Colick.
The Bark of the Root is a Specifick to those afflicted with the Gripes.
The same in Powder, and a Lotion made thereof, is much used by the Savages,
to mundify old Ulcers, and for several other Uses; being highly esteem'd
among them.

{Dog-wood.}
Dog-Wood is plentiful on our light Land, inclining to a rich Soil.
It flowers the first in the Woods; its white Blossom making the Forest
very beautiful.  It has a fine Grain, and serves for several Uses
within doors; but is not durable.  The Bark of this Root infused,
is held an infallible Remedy against the Worms.

{Laurel.}
Laurel, before-mention'd; as to its Bigness and Use, I have seen Planks
sawn of this Wood; but 'tis not found durable in the Weather;
yet pretty enough for many other Uses.

Bay and Laurel generally delight in a low, swampy Ground.  I know no Use
they make of them, but for Fire-Wood, excepting what I spoke of before,
amongst the Ever-Greens.

{Ever-green.}
A famous Ever-Green I must now mention, which was forgotten amongst the rest.
It is in Leaf like a Jessamine, but larger, and of a harder Nature.
This grows up to a large Vine, and twists itself round the Trees
it grows near, making a very fine Shade.  I never saw any thing of that Nature
outdo it, and if it be cut away close to the Ground, it will presently
spring up again, it being impossible to destroy it, when once it has got Root.
'Tis an ornamental Plant, and worth the Transplanting.  Its Seed
is a black Berry.

{Trumpet-Vine.}
The Scarlet Trumpet-Vine bears a glorious red Flower, like a Bell, or Trumpet,
and makes a Shade inferiour to none that I ever saw; yet it leaves us,
when the Winter comes, and remains naked till the next Spring.
It bears a large Cod, that holds its Seed.

{Maycock.}
The Maycock bears a glorious Flower, and Apple of an agreeable Sweet,
mixt with an acid Taste.  This is also a Summer-Vine.

{Indico-Trees.}
The Indico grows plentifully in our Quarters.

{Bay-Tulips.}
The Bay-Tulip-Tree is a fine Ever-green which grows frequently here.

{Sweet Gum.}
The sweet Gum-Tree, so call'd, because of the fragrant Gum it yields
in the Spring-time, upon Incision of the Bark, or Wood.  It cures
the Herpes and Inflammations; being apply'd to the Morphew and Tettars.
'Tis an extraordinary Balsam, and of great Value to those
who know how to use it.  No Wood has scarce a better Grain;
whereof fine Tables, Drawers, and other Furniture might be made.
Some of it is curiously curl'd.  It bears a round Bur, with a sort of Prickle,
which is the Seed.

{Black Gums.}
Of the Black Gum there grows, with us, two sorts; both fit for Cart-Naves.
The one bears a black, well-tasted Berry, which the Indians mix
with their Pulse and Soups, it giving 'em a pretty Flavour,
and scarlet Colour.  The Bears crop these Trees for the Berries,
which they mightily covet, yet kill'd in that Season, they eat very unsavory;
which must be occasion'd by this Fruit, because, at other times,
when they feed on Mast, Bears-Flesh is a very well-tasted Food.
The other Gum bears a Berry in shape like the other,
tho' bitter and ill-tasted.  This Tree (the Indians report)
is never wounded by Lightning.  It has no certain Grain;
and it is almost impossible to split or rive it.

{White Gum.}
The white Gum, bearing a sort of long bunch'd Flowers,
is the most curled and knotted Wood I ever saw, which would make
curious Furniture, in case it was handled by a good Workman.

{Red Cedar.}
The red sort of Cedar is an Ever-green, of which Carolina affords Plenty.
That on the Salts, grows generally on the Sand-banks; and that in the Freshes
is found in the Swamps.  Of this Wood, Tables, Wainscot,
and other Necessaries, are made, and esteemed for its sweet Smell.
It is as durable a Wood as any we have, therefore much used
in Posts for Houses and Sills; likewise to build Sloops,
Boats, &c. by reason the Worm will not touch it, for several Years.
The Vessels built thereof are very durable, and good Swimmers.
Of this Cedar, Ship-loads may be exported.  It has been heretofore
so plentiful in this Settlement, that they have fenced in Plantations with it,
and the Coffins of the Dead are generally made thereof.

{White Cedar.}
White Cedar, so call'd, because it nearly approaches the other Cedar,
in Smell, Bark, and Leaf; only this grows taller, being as strait as an Arrow.
It is extraordinary light, and free to rive.  'Tis good for Yard, Top-Masts,
Booms and Boltsprits, being very tough.  The best Shingles for Houses
are made of this Wood, it being no Strain to the Roof, and never rots.
Good Pails and other Vessels, free from Leakage, are likewise made thereof.
The Bark of this and the red Cedar, the Indians use to make their Cabins of,
which prove firm, and resist all Weathers.

{Cypress.}
Cypress is not an Ever-green with us, and is therefore call'd
the bald Cypress, because the Leaves, during the Winter-Season, turn red,
not recovering their Verdure till the Spring.  These Trees are the largest
for Height and Thickness, that we have in this Part of the World;
some of them holding thirty-six Foot in Circumference.  Upon Incision,
they yield a sweet-smelling Grain, tho' not in great Quantities; and the Nuts
which these Trees bear plentifully, yield a most odoriferous Balsam,
that infallibly cures all new and green Wounds, which the Inhabitants
are well acquainted withal.  Of these great Trees the Pereaugers and Canoes
are scoop'd and made; which sort of Vessels are chiefly
to pass over the Rivers, Creeks, and Bays; and to transport Goods and Lumber
from one River to another.  Some are so large, as to carry thirty Barrels,
tho' of one entire Piece of Timber.  Others, that are split down the Bottom,
and a piece added thereto, will carry eighty, or an hundred.
Several have gone out of our Inlets on the Ocean to Virginia,
laden with Pork, and other Produce of the Country.  Of these Trees
curious Boats for Pleasure may be made, and other necessary Craft.
Some Years ago, a foolish Man in Albemarl and his Son,
had got one of these Canoes deck'd.  She held, as I take it, sixteen Barrels.
He brought her to the Collectors, to be clear'd for Barbados;
but the Officer took him for a Man that had lost his Senses,
and argu'd the Danger and Impossibility of performing such a Voyage,
in a hollow Tree; but the Fellow would hearken to no Advice of that kind,
till the Gentleman told him, if he did not value his own Life,
he valu'd his Reputation and Honesty, and so flatly refus'd clearing him;
Upon which, the Canoe was sold, and, I think, remains in being still.
This Wood is very lasting, and free from the Rot.  A Canoe of it
will outlast four Boats, and seldom wants Repair.  They say,
that a Chest made of this Wood, will suffer no Moth, or Vermine,
to abide therein.

{Two sorts of Locust white and yellow, is rare if varnish'd.}
The Locust, for its enduring the Weather, is chosen for all sorts of Works
that are exposed thereto.  It bears a Leaf nearest the Liquorice-Plant.
'Tis a pretty tall Tree.  Of this the Indians make their choicest Bows,
it being very tough and flexible.  We have little or none of this Wood
in Pampticough.

{Honey Tree a Locust.}
The Honey-Tree bears as great a Resemblance to the Locust,
as a Shallot does to an Onion.  It is of that Species, but more prickly.
They bear a Cod, one side whereof contains the Seed, the other the Honey;
They will bear in five Years, from the Kernel.  They were first brought
(by the Indian Traders) and propagated, by their Seed,
at the Apamaticks in Virginia.  Last Year, I planted the Seed,
and had them sprung up before I came from thence, which was in August.
Of the Honey, very good Metheglin is made, there being Orchards
planted in Virginia for that intent.

{Sowr Wood.}
The Sorrel, or Sowr-Wood-Tree, is so call'd, because the Leaves
taste like Sorrel.  Some are about a Foot or ten Inches Diameter.
I am unacquainted with its Vertues at present.

{Pine.}
Of Pines, there are, in Carolina, at least, four sorts.  The Pitch-Pine,
growing to a great Bigness, most commonly has but a short Leaf.
Its Wood (being replete with abundance of Bitumen) is so durable,
that it seems to suffer no Decay, tho' exposed to all Weathers, for many Ages;
and is used in several Domestick and Plantation Uses.  This Tree affords
the four great Necessaries, Pitch, Tar, Rozin, and Turpentine;
which two last are extracted by tapping, and the Heat of the Sun,
the other two by the Heat of the Fire.

The white and yellow Pines are saw'd into Planks for several Uses.
They make Masts, Yards, and a great many other Necessaries therewith,
the Pine being the most useful Tree in the Woods.

The Almond-Pine serves for Masts very well.  As for the Dwarf-Pine,
it is for Shew alone, being an Ever-green, as they all are.

{Hiccory the best Fire-wood.}
The Hiccory is of the Walnut-kind, and bears a Nut as they do,
of which there are found three sorts.  The first is that
which we call the common white Hiccory.  It is not a durable Wood;
for if cut down, and exposed to the Weather, it will be quite rotten,
and spoil'd in three Years; as will likewise the Beech of this Country.
Hiccory Nuts have very hard Shells, but excellent sweet Kernels,
with which, in a plentiful Year, the old Hogs, that can crack them,
fatten themselves, and make excellent Pork.  These Nuts are gotten,
in great Quantities, by the Savages, and laid up for Stores,
of which they make several Dishes and Banquets.  One of these
I cannot forbear mentioning; it is this:  They take these Nuts,
and break them very small betwixt two Stones, till the Shells and Kernels
are indifferent small; And this Powder you are presented withal
in their Cabins, in little wooden Dishes; the Kernel dissolves in your Mouth,
and the Shell is spit out.  This tastes as well as any Almond.
Another Dish is the Soup which they make of these Nuts, beaten,
and put into Venison-Broth, which dissolves the Nut, and thickens,
whilst the Shell precipitates, and remains at the bottom.
This Broth tastes very rich.  {Red Hiccory.}  There is another sort,
which we call red Hiccory, the Heart thereof being very red,
firm and durable; of which Walking-Sticks, Mortars, Pestils,
and several other fine Turnery-wares are made.  The third is call'd
the Flying-bark'd Hiccory, from its brittle and scaly Bark.
It bears a Nut with a bitter Kernel and a soft Shell, like a French Walnut.
Of this Wood, Coggs for Mills are made, &c.  The Leaves smell very fragrant.

{Walnut.}
The Walnut-Tree of America is call'd Black Walnut.  I suppose,
that Name was, at first, to distinguish it from the Hiccories,
it having a blacker Bark.  This Tree grows, in good Land,
to a prodigious Bigness.  The Wood is very firm and durable,
of which Tables and Chests of Drawers are made, and prove very well.
Some of this is very knotty, which would make the best Returns for England,
tho' the Masters of Vessels refuse it, not understanding its Goodness.
'Tis a very good and durable Wood, to bottom Vessels for the Sea withal;
and they say, that it is never eaten by the Worm.  The Nuts have
a large Kernel, which is very oily, except lain by, a long time, to mellow.
The Shell is very thick, as all the native Nuts of America are.
When it has its yellow outward Coat on, it looks and smells much like a Lemon.

{Maple.}
The Maple, of which we have two sorts, is used to make Trenchers,
Spinning-wheels, &c. withal.

{Chinkapin.}
Chinkapin is a sort of Chesnut, whose Nuts are most commonly very plentiful;
insomuch that the Hogs get fat with them.  They are rounder and smaller
than a Chesnut, but much sweeter.  The Wood is much of the Nature of Chesnut,
having a Leaf and Grain almost like it.  It is used to timber Boats,
Shallops, &c. and makes any thing that is to endure the Weather.
This and the Hiccory are very tough Rods used to whip Horses withal;
yet their Wood, in Substance, is very brittle.  This Tree
the Vine much delights to twist about.  It's good Fire-Wood,
but very sparkling, as well as Sassafras.

{Birch.}
The Birch grows all on the Banks of our Rivers, very high up.
I never saw a Tree on the Salts.  It differs something, in Bark,
from the European Birch.  Its Buds in April are eaten by the Parrakeetos,
which resort, from all Parts, at that Season, to feed thereon.
Where this Wood grows, we are not yet seated; and as to the Wine,
or other Profits it would yield, we are, at present, Strangers to.

{Willow.}
The Willow, here, likewise differs both in Bark and Leaf.  It is frequently
found on the Banks of fresh Water, as the Birch is.

{Sycamore.}
The Sycamore, in these Parts, grows in a low, swampy Land, by River-sides.
Its Bark is quite different from the English, and the most beautiful
I ever saw, being mottled and clowded with several Colours,
as white, blue, &c.  It bears no Keys but a Bur like the sweet Gum.
Its Uses I am ignorant of.

{Aspin.}
I never saw any Aspin, but in Rapahannock-River, from whence I brought one,
(that was presented me there as a great Present) but it died by the way.

{Holly.}
Of Holly we have two sorts; one having a large Leaf, the other a smaller.
They grow very thick in our low Woods.  Many of them are very strait,
and two Foot Diameter.  They make good Trenchers, and other Turnery-Ware.

{Red-Bud.}
The Red-Bud-Tree bears a purple Lark-Heel, and is the best Sallad,
of any Flower I ever saw.  It is ripe in April and May.
They grow in Trees, generally small, but some are a Foot Diameter.

{Pelletory.}
Pelletory grows on the Sand-Banks and Islands.  It is used
to cure the Tooth-ach, by putting a Piece of the Bark in the Mouth,
which being very hot, draws a Rhume from the Mouth, and causes much Spittle.
The Indians use it to make their Composition, which they give
to their young Men and Boys, when they are husquenaw'd, of which you shall
hear farther, when I come to treat of the Customs, &c. of that People.

{Arrow-Wood.}
Arrow-Wood, growing on the Banks, is used, by the Indians,
for Arrows and Gun-Sticks.  It grows as strait, as if plain'd,
and is of all Sizes.  'Tis as tough and pliable, as the smallest Canes.

{Chesnut.}
The Chesnut-Tree of Carolina, grows up towards the hilly Part thereof,
is a very large and durable Wood, and fit for House-Frames, Palisado's,
Sills, and many other Uses.  The Nut is smaller than those from Portugal,
but sweeter.

{Oak-Vine.}
This is no Tree, but call'd the Oak-Vine, by reason it bears a sort of Bur
as the Oak does, and generally runs up those Trees.  It's so porous,
that you suck Liquors thro' a Length of two Foot.

Prickly-Ash grows up like a Pole; of which the Indians and English
make Poles to set their Canoes along in Shoal-Water.  It's very light,
and full of Thorns or Prickles, bearing Berries in large Clusters,
of a purple Colour, not much unlike the Alder.  The Root of this Tree
is Cathartick and Emetick, used in Cachexies.

{Poison Vine.}
The Poison Vine is so called, because it colours the Hands of those
who handle it.  What the Effects of it may be, I cannot relate;
neither do I believe, that any has made an Experiment thereof.
The Juice of this will stain Linnen, never to wash out.  It marks
a blackish blue Colour, which is done only by breaking a bit of the Vine off,
and writing what you please therewith.  I have thought,
that the East-India Natives set their Colours, by some such Means,
into their finest Callicoes.  It runs up any Tree it meets withal,
and clasps round about it.  The Leaves are like Hemlock,
and fall off in Winter.

{Canes and Reeds.}
Of Canes and Reeds we have many sorts.  The hollow Reed, or Cane,
such as Angling-Rods are made of, and Weavers use, we have great Plenty of,
though none to the Northward of James-River in Virginia.
They always grow in Branches and low Ground.  Their Leaves endure the Winter,
in which Season our Cattle eat them greedily.  We have them
(towards the Heads of our Rivers) so large, that one Joint will hold
above a pint of Liquor.

{Bamboo.}
The small Bamboo is next, which is a certain Vine, like the rest
of these Species, growing in low Land.  They seldom, with us,
grow thicker than a Man's little Finger, and are very tough.
Their Root is a round Ball, which the Indians boil as we do Garden-Roots,
and eat them.  When these Roots have been some time out of the Ground,
they become hard, and make good Heads to the Canes, on which
several pretty Figures may be cut.  There are several others of this kind,
not thoroughly discover'd.

{Palmeto.}
That Palmeto grows with us, which we call the dwarfish sort;
but the Palmeto-Tree I have not yet met withal in North-Carolina,
of which you have a Description elsewhere.  We shall next treat
of the Spontaneous Fruits of this Country; and then proceed to those
that have been transplanted from Europe, and other Parts.

{Natural Vines.}
Among the natural Fruits, the Vine first takes place, of which
I find six sorts, very well known.  {Bunch-Grapes.}  The first
is the black Bunch-Grapes, which yield a Crimson Juice.
These grow common, and bear plentifully.  They are of a good Relish,
though not large, yet well knit in the Clusters.  They have a thickish Skin,
and large Stone, which makes them not yield much Juice.
There is another sort of Black-Grapes like the former, in all respects,
save that their Juice is of a light Flesh-Colour, inclining to a White.
I once saw a Spontaneous white Bunch-Grape in Carolina;
but the Cattle browzing on the Sprouts thereof in the Spring, it died.
{Fox-Grapes.}  Of those which we call Fox-Grapes, we have four sorts;
two whereof are called Summer-Grapes, because ripe in July;
the other two Winter-Fruit, because not ripe till September or October.
The Summer Fox-Grapes grow not in Clusters, or great Bunches,
but are about five or six in a Bunch, about the Bigness of a Damson,
or larger.  The black sort are frequent, the white not so commonly found.
They always grow in Swamps, and low moist Lands, running sometimes very high,
and being shady, and therefore proper for Arbours.  They afford
the largest Leaf I ever saw, to my remembrance, the Back of which
is of a white Horse-flesh Colour.  This Fruit always ripens in the Shade.
I have transplanted them into my Orchard, and find they thrive well,
if manured:  A Neighbour of mine has done the same; mine were by Slips,
his from the Roots, which thrive to Admiration, and bear Fruit,
tho' not so juicy as the European Grape, but of a glutinous Nature.
However, it is pleasant enough to eat.

The other Winter Fox-Grapes, are much of the same Bigness.
These refuse no Ground, swampy or dry, but grow plentifully
on the Sand-Hills along the Sea-Coast, and elsewhere, and are great Bearers.
I have seen near twelve Bushels upon one Vine of the black sort.
Some of these, when thoroughly ripe, have a very pretty vinous Taste,
and eat very well, yet are glutinous.  The white sort
are clear and transparent, and indifferent small Stones.
Being removed by the Slip or Root, they thrive well in our Gardens,
and make pleasant Shades.

{Persimmons.}
Persimmon is a Tree, that agrees with all Lands and Soils.
Their Fruit, when ripe, is nearest our Medlar; if eaten before,
draws your Mouth up like a Purse, being the greatest Astringent
I ever met withal, therefore very useful in some Cases.  The Fruit, if ripe,
will presently cleanse a foul Wound, but causes Pain.  The Fruit is rotten,
when ripe, and commonly contains four flat Kernels, call'd Stones,
which is the Seed.  'Tis said, the Cortex Peruvianus comes
from a Persimmon-Tree, that grows in New-Spain.  I have try'd
the Drying of this Bark, to imitate it, which it does tolerably well,
and agrees therewith.  It is binding enough to work the same Effect.
The Tree, in extraordinary Land, comes sometimes to two Foot Diameter,
though not often.  There are two sorts of this Fruit; one ripe in Summer,
the other when the Frost visits us.

{Mulberry.}
We have three sorts of Mulberries, besides the different Bigness
of some Trees Fruit.  The first is the common red Mulberry,
whose Fruit is the earliest we have, (except the Strawberries) and very sweet.
These Trees make a very fine Shade, to sit under in Summer-time.
They are found wild in great Quantities, wherever the Land is light and rich;
yet their Fruit is much better when they stand open.  They are used
instead of Raisins and Currants, and make several pretty Kickshaws.
They yield a transparent Crimson Liquor, which would make good Wine;
but few Peoples Inclinations in this Country tend that way.
The others are a smooth-leav'd Mulberry, fit for the Silk-Worm.
One bears a white Fruit, which is common; the other bears a small black Berry,
very sweet.  They would persuade me there, that the black Mulberry
with the Silk-Worm smooth Leaf, was a white Mulberry, and changed its Fruit.
The Wood hereof is very durable, and where the Indians cannot get Locust,
they make use of this to make their Bows.  This Tree grows
extraordinary round and pleasant to the Eye.

The Hiccory, Walnut, Chinkapin and Chesnut, with their Fruits,
we have mention'd before.

{Hazle-Nut.}
The Hazle-Nut grows plentifully in some places of this Country;
especially, towards the Mountains; but ours are not so good
as the English Nuts, having a much thicker Shell (like all
the Fruits of America, that I ever met withal) which in Hardness
exceeds those of Europe.

{Black-Cherries.}
The Cherries of the Woods grow to be very large Trees.  One sort,
which is rarely found, is red, and not much unlike the Cornel-Berry.
But the common Cherry grows high, and in Bunches, like English Currants,
but much larger.  They are of a bitterish sweet Relish,
and are equally valuable with our small Black-Cherries,
for an Infusion in Spirits.  They yield a crimson Liquor,
and are great Bearers.

{Rasberries.}
Our Rasberries are of a purple Colour, and agreeable Relish,
almost like the English; but I reckon them not quite so rich.
When once planted, 'tis hard to root them out.  They run wild
all over the Country, and will bear the same Year you transplant them,
as I have found by Experience.

{Hurts.}
The Hurts, Huckle-Berries, or Blues of this Country, are four sorts,
which we are well acquainted withal; but more Species of this sort,
and all others, Time and Enquiry must discover.  The first sort is
the same Blue or Bilberry, that grows plentifully in the North of England,
and in other Places, commonly on your Heaths, Commons, and Woods,
where Brakes or Fern grows.

The second sort grows on a small Bush in our Savannas and Meads,
and in the Woods.  They are larger than the common Fruit,
and have larger Seed.

The third grows on the single Stem of a Stick that grows in low good Land,
and on the Banks of Rivers.  They grow three or four Foot high,
and are very pleasant like the first sort, but larger.

The fourth sort grows upon Trees, some ten and twelve Foot high,
and the Thickness of a Man's Arm; these are found in the Runs and low Grounds,
and are very pleasant, and bear wonderfully.  The English sometimes
dry them in the Sun, and keep them to use in the Winter,
instead of Currants.  The Indians get many Bushels, and dry them on Mats,
whereof they make Plum-Bread, and many other Eatables.
They are good in Tarts, or infused in Liquors.

{Piemento.}
In the same Ground, commonly grows the Piemento, or All-Spice-Tree,
whose Berries differ in shape from those in the West-Indies,
being Taper or Conick, yet not inferiour, to any of that sort.
This Tree grows much like the Hurts, and is of the same Bigness.
I have known it transplanted to high Land, where it thrives.

{Dews.  Black-Berries.}
Our Dew-Berries are very good.  But the Black-Berries are bitterish,
and not so palatable, as in England.

{Sugar Tree.}
The Sugar-Tree ought to have taken place before.  It is found
in no other parts of Carolina or America, that I ever learnt,
but in Places that are near the Mountains.  It's most like one sort of Maple,
of any Tree, and may be rank'd amongst that kind.  This Tree,
which, I am told, is of a very tedious Growth, is found very plentifully
towards the Heads of some of our Rivers.  The Indians tap it,
and make Gourds to receive the Liquor, which Operation is done
at distinct and proper times, when it best yields its Juice,
of which, when the Indians have gotten enough, they carry it home,
and boil it to a just Consistence of Sugar, which grains of itself,
and serves for the same Uses, as other Sugar does.

{Papau.}
The Papau is not a large Tree.  I think, I never saw one a Foot through;
but has the broadest Leaf of any Tree in the Woods, and bears an Apple
about the Bigness of a Hen's Egg, yellow, soft, and as sweet,
as any thing can well be.  They make rare Puddings of this Fruit.
The Apple contains a large Stone.

{Wild Fig.}
The wild Fig grows in Virginia, up in the Mountains, as I am inform'd
by a Gentleman of my acquaintance, who is a Person of Credit,
and a great Traveller in America.  I shall be glad to have an Opportunity
to make Tryal what Improvement might be made of this wild Fruit.

{Plum red.}
The wild Plums of America are of several sorts.  Those which I can give
an account of from my own Knowledge, I will, and leave the others
till a farther Discovery.  The most frequent is that which we call
the common Indian Plum, of which there are two sorts, if not more.
One of these is ripe much sooner than the other, and differs in the Bark;
one of the Barks being very scaly, like our American Birch.
These Trees, when in Blossom, smell as sweet as any Jessamine,
and look as white as a Sheet, being something prickly.  You may make it grow
to what Shape you please; they are very ornamental about a House,
and make a wonderful fine Shew at a Distance, in the Spring,
because of their white Livery.  Their Fruit is red, and very palatable
to the sick.  They are of a quick Growth, and will bear from the Stone
in five Years, on their Stock.  The English large black Plum thrives well,
as does the Cherry, being grafted thereon.

{Damsons of America.}
The American Damsons are both black and white, and about the Bigness of
an European Damson.  They grow any where, if planted from the Stone or Slip;
bear a white Blossom, and are a good Fruit.  They are found on the Sand-Banks
all along the Coast of America.  I have planted several in my Orchard,
that came from the Stone, which thrive well amongst the rest of my Trees.
But they never grow to the Bigness of the other Trees now spoken of.
These are plentiful Bearers.

There is a third sort of Plum about the Bigness of the Damson.
The Tree is taller, seldom exceeding ten Inches in Thickness.
The Plum seems to taste physically, yet I never found any Operation it had,
except to make their Lips sore, that eat them.  The Wood is something porous,
but exceeds any Box, for a beautiful Yellow.

{Winter Currant.}
There is a very pretty, bushy Tree, about seven or eight Foot high,
very spreading, which bears a Winter-Fruit, that is ripe in October.
They call 'em Currants, but they are nearer a Hurt.  I have eaten
very pretty Tarts made thereof.  They dry them instead of Currants.
This Bush is very beautiful.

{Bermudas Currants.}
The Bermudas Currants grow in the Woods on a Bush, much like
the European Currant.  Some People eat them very much; but for my part,
I can see nothing inviting in them, and reckon them a very indifferent Fruit.

{April Currants.}
We have another Currant, which grows on the Banks of Rivers,
or where only Clay hath been thrown up.  This Fruit is red,
and gone almost as soon as come.  They are a pretty Fruit
whilst they last, and the Tree (for 'tis not a Bush) they grow upon,
is a very pleasant Vegetable.

{Red Haws.}
The Haw-thorn grows plentifully in some parts of this Country.
The Haws are quite different from those in England, being four times as big,
and of a very pleasant agreeable Taste.  We make no use of this Plant,
nor any other, for Hedges, because Timber is so plentiful at present.
In my Judgment, the Honey-Locust would be the fittest for Hedges;
because it is very apt to shoot forth many Sprouts and Succours
from the Roots; besides, it is of a quick Growth, and very prickly.

{Black-Haws.}
The Black Haw grows on a slender Tree, about the Height of a Quince-Tree,
or something higher, and bears the black Haw, which People eat,
and the Birds covet also.  What Vertues the Fruit or Wood is of,
I cannot resolve you, at present.

{Services.}
Thus have I given an Account of all the Spontaneous Fruits of Carolina,
that have come to my Knowledge, excepting Services, which I have seen
in the Indians Hands, and eat of them, but never saw,
how nor where they grew.  There may very well be expected
a great many more Fruits, which are the natural Product of this Country,
when we consider the Fruitfulness of the Soil and Climate,
and account for the vast Tract of Land, (great part of which
is not yet found out) according to the Product of that which
is already discover'd, which (as I once hinted before) is not as yet
arriv'd to our Knowledge, we having very little or no Correspondence
amongst the mountainous Parts of this Province, and towards
the Country of Messiasippi, all which we have strange Accounts of,
and some very large ones, with respect to the different and noble Fruits,
and several other Ornaments and Blessings of Nature which
Messiasippi possesses; more to be coveted, than any of those we enjoy,
to the Eastward of the Mountains:  Yet when I came to discourse
some of the Idolizers of that Country, I found it to be rather Novelty,
than Truth and Reality, that induced those Persons to allow it
such Excellencies above others.  It may be a brave and fertile Country,
as I believe it is; but I cannot be persuaded, that it can be
near so advantageous as ours, which is much better situated for Trade,
being faced all along with the Ocean, as the English America is;
when the other is only a direct River, in the midst of a wild unknown Land,
greatest part of whose Product must be fetch'd, or brought a great way,
before it can come to a Market.  Moreover, such great Rivers
commonly allow of more Princes Territories than one; and thus nothing
but War and Contention accompanies the Inhabitants thereof.

But not to trouble our Readers with any more of this, we will proceed,
in the next place, to shew, what Exotick Fruits we have, that thrive well
in Carolina; and what others, it may reasonably be suppos'd, would do there,
were they brought thither and planted.  In pursuance of which,
I will set down a Catalogue of what Fruits we have; I mean Species:
For should I pretend to give a regular Name to every one;
it's neither possible for me to do it, nor for any one to understand it,
when done; if we consider, that the chiefest part of our Fruit came
from the Kernel, and some others from the Succours, or Sprouts of the Tree.
First, we will begin with Apples; which are the

{Apples.}
    Golden Russet.
    Pearmain  | Winter.
              | Summer.
    Harvey-Apple, I cannot tell, whether the same as in England.
    Winter Queening.
    Leather Coat.
    Juniting.
    Codlin.
    Redstreak.
    Long-stalk.
    Lady-Finger.

The Golden Russet thrives well.

The Pearmains, of both sorts, are apt to speck, and rot on the Trees;
and the Trees are damaged and cut off by the Worm, which breeds in the Forks,
and other parts thereof; and often makes a Circumposition,
by destroying the Bark round the Branches, till it dies.

Harvey-Apple; that which we call so, is esteem'd very good to make Cider of.

Winter Queening is a durable Apple, and makes good Cider.

Leather-Coat; both Apple and Tree stand well.

The Juniting is early ripe, and soon gone, in these warm Countries.

Codlin; no better, and fairer Fruit in the World; yet the Tree suffers
the same Distemper, as the Pearmains, or rather worse; the Trees always dying
before they come to their Growth.

The Redstreak thrives very well.

Long-stalk is a large Apple, with a long Stalk, and makes good Summer Cider.

We beat the first of our Codlin Cider, against reaping our Wheat,
which is from the tenth of June, to the five and twentieth.

Lady-Finger, the long Apple, the same as in England, and full as good.
We have innumerable sorts; some call'd Rope-Apples which are small Apples,
hanging like Ropes of Onions; Flattings, Grigsons, Cheese-Apples,
and a great number of Names, given according to every ones Discretion.

{Pears.}
The Warden-Pear here proves a good eating Pear; and is not so long ripening
as in England.

Katharine excellent.

Sugar-pear.

And several others without Name, The Bergamot we have not,
nor either of the Bonne Chrestiennes, though I hear, they are all three
in Virginia.  Those sorts of Pears which we have, are as well relisht,
as ever I eat any where; but that Fruit is of very short Continuance with us,
for they are gone almost as soon as ripe.

{Quinces.}
I am not a Judge of the different sorts of Quinces, which they call
Brunswick, Portugal, and Barbary; But as to the Fruit, in general,
I believe no Place has fairer and better relisht.  They are very pleasant
eaten raw.  Of this Fruit, they make a Wine, or Liquor,
which they call Quince-Drink, and which I approve of beyond any Drink
which that Country affords, though a great deal of Cider and some Perry
is there made.  The Quince-Drink most commonly purges those
that first drink it, and cleanses the Body very well.
The Argument of the Physicians, that they bind People, is hereby contradicted,
unless we allow the Quinces to differ in the two Countries.
The least Slip of this Tree stuck in the Ground, comes to bear in three years.

{Peaches.}
All Peaches, with us, are standing; neither have we any Wall-Fruit
in Carolina; for we have Heat enough, and therefore do not require it.
We have a great many sorts of this Fruit, which all thrive to Admiration,
Peach-Trees coming to Perfection (with us) as easily as the Weeds.
A Peach falling on the Ground, brings a Peach-Tree that shall bear
in three years, or sometimes sooner.  Eating Peaches in our Orchards
makes them come up so thick from the Kernel, that we are forced
to take a great deal of Care to weed them out; otherwise they make our Land
a Wilderness of Peach-Trees.  They generally bear so full,
that they break great part of their Limbs down.  We have likewise
very fair Nectarines, especially the red, that clings to the Stone,
the other yellow Fruit, that leaves the Stone; of the last,
I have a Tree, that, most Years, brings me fifteen or twenty Bushels.
I see no Foreign Fruit like this, for thriving in all sorts of Land,
and bearing its Fruit to Admiration.  I want to be satisfy'd about
one sort of this Fruit, which the Indians claim as their own, and affirm,
they had it growing amongst them, before any Europeans came to America.
The Fruit I will describe, as exactly as I can.  The Tree grows very large,
most commonly as big as a handsome Apple-tree; the Flowers are of a reddish,
murrey Colour; the Fruit is rather more downy, than the yellow Peach,
and commonly very large and soft, being very full of Juice.
They part freely from the Stone, and the Stone is much thicker
than all the other Peach Stones we have, which seems to me,
that it is a Spontaneous Fruit of America; yet in those Parts of America
that we inhabit, I never could hear that any Peach-Trees were ever found
growing in the Woods; neither have the foreign Indians, that live remote
from the English, any other sort.  And those living amongst us
have a hundred of this sort for one other; they are a hardy Fruit,
and are seldom damaged by the North-East Blasts, as others are.
Of this sort we make Vinegar; wherefore we call them Vinegar-Peaches,
and sometimes Indian-Peaches.

{Apricock.}
This Tree grows to a vast Bigness, exceeding most Apple-Trees.
They bear well, tho' sometimes an early Spring comes on in February,
and perhaps, when the Tree is fully blown the Cloudy North-East-Winds
which attend the end of, that Month, or the beginning of March,
destroy most of the Fruit.  The biggest Apricock-Tree I ever saw,
as they told me, was grafted on a Peach-Stock, in the Ground.
I know of no other sort with us, than the Common.  We generally
raise this Fruit from the Stone, which never fails to bring the same Fruit.
Likewise our Peach-Stones effect the same, without so much as once missing,
to produce the same sort that the Stone came from.

{Plum.}
Damson, Damazeen, and a large round black Plum are all I have met withal
in Carolina.  They thrive well enough; the last to Admiration,
and becomes a very large Tree, if in stiff Ground; otherwise they will not
do well.

{Figs.}
Of Figs we have two sorts; One is the low Bush-Fig, which bears a large Fruit.
If the Winter happens to have much Frost, the tops thereof die,
and in the Spring sprout again, and bear two or three good Crops.

The Tree-Fig is a lesser Fig, though very sweet.  The Tree grows
to a large Body and Shade, and generally brings a good Burden;
especially, if in light Land.  This Tree thrives no where better,
than on the Sand-Banks by the Sea.

{Cherries.}
We have the common red and black Cherry, which bear well.
I never saw any grafted in this Country, the common excepted,
which was grafted on an Indian Plum-stock, and bore well.
This is a good way, because our common Cherry-Trees are very apt
to put Scions all round the Tree, for a great Distance, which must needs be
prejudicial to the Tree and Fruit.  Not only our Cherries are apt to do so,
but our Apples and most other Fruit-Trees, which may chiefly be imputed
to the Negligence and Unskilfulness of the Gardener.  Our Cherries are ripe
a Month sooner than in Virginia.

{Goosberry.}
Goosberries I have seen of the smaller sort, but find they do not do so well
as in England, and to the Northward.  Want of Dressing may be
some Reason for this.

{Currants.}
Currants, White, Red, and Black, thrive here, as well as any where.

{Rasps.}
Rasberries, the red and white, I never saw any Trial made of.
But there is no doubt of their thriving to Admiration,
since those of the Country do so well.

{Mulberry.}
The Mulberries are spontaneous.  We have no others, than what I have
already mentioned in the Class of Natural Fruits of Carolina.

{Barberry.}
Barberry red, with Stones, and without Stones, grow here.

{Strawberry.}
Strawberries, not Foreign, but those of the Country, grow here
in great Plenty.  Last April I planted a Bed of two hundred Foot in Length,
which bore the same Year.

{Medlar.}
Medlars we have none.

{Walnut.}
All sorts of Walnuts from England, France, and Maderas,
thrive well from the Nut.

{Filbert.}
No Filberts, but Hazle-Nuts; the Filbert-Nut planted,
becomes a good Hazle-Nut, and no better.

{Vines.}
As for that noble Vegetable the Vine, without doubt, it may
(in this Country) be improved, and brought to the same Perfection,
as it is, at this Day, in the same Latitude in Europe,
since the chiefest part of this Country is a deep, rich, black Mould,
which is up towards the Freshes and Heads of our Rivers,
being very rich and mix'd with Flint, Pebbles, and other Stones.
And this sort of Soil is approv'd of (by all knowing Gardeners and Vigneroons)
as a proper Earth, in which the Grape chiefly delights; and what seems
to give a farther Confirmation hereof, is, that the largest Vines,
that were ever discover'd to grow wild, are found in those Parts,
oftentimes in such Plenty, and are so interwoven with one another,
that 'tis impossible to pass through them.  Moreover, in these Freshes,
towards the Hills, the Vines are above five times bigger than those
generally with us, who are seated in the Front-parts of this Country,
adjoining to the Salts.  Of the wild Vines, which are most of them
great Bearers, some Wine has been made, which I drank of.
It was very strong and well relisht; but what detains them all from offering
at great quantities, they add, that this Grape has a large Stone,
and a thick Skin, and consequently yields but a small Quantity of Wine.
Some Essays of this Nature have been made by that Honourable Knight,
Sir Nathanael Johnson, in South Carolina, who, as I am inform'd,
has rejected all Exotick Vines, and makes his Wine from the natural
black Grape of Carolina, by grafting it upon its own Stock.
What Improvement this may arrive to, I cannot tell; but in other Species,
I own Grafting and Imbudding yields speedy Fruit, tho' I never found
that it made them better.

New planted Colonies are generally attended with a Force and Necessity
of Planting the known and approved Staple and Product of the Country,
as well as all the Provisions their Families spend.  Therefore we
can entertain but small hopes of the Improvement of the Vine,
till some skilful in dressing Vines shall appear amongst us,
and go about it, with a Resolution, that Ordering the Vineyard
shall be one half of their Employment.  If this be begun and carried on,
with that Assiduity and Resolution which it requires,
then we may reasonably hope to see this a Wine-Country;
for then, when it becomes a general Undertaking, every one will be capable
to add something to the common Stock, of that which he has gain'd
by his own Experience.  This way would soon make the Burden light,
and a great many shorter and exacter Curiosities, and real Truths
would be found out in a short time.  The trimming of Vines,
as they do in France, that is, to a Stump, must either here be not follow'd,
or we are not sensible of the exact time, when they ought to be thus pruned;
for Experience has taught us, that the European Grape,
suffer'd to run and expand itself at large, has been found to bear
as well in America, as it does in Europe; when, at the same time,
the same sort of Vine trimm'd to a Stump, as before spoken of,
has born a poor Crop for one Year or two; and by its spilling, after cutting,
emaciated, and in three or four Years, died.  This Experiment, I believe,
has never fail'd; for I have trimm'd the natural Vine the French way,
which has been attended, at last, with the same Fate.  Wherefore, it seems
most expedient, to leave the Vines more Branches here, than in Europe,
or let them run up Trees, as some do, in Lombardy, upon Elms.
The Mulberries and Chinkapin are tough, and trimm'd to what you please,
therefore fit Supporters of the Vines.  Gelding and plucking away the Leaves,
to hasten the ripening of this Fruit, may not be unnecessary,
yet we see the natural wild Grape generally ripens in the Shade.
Nature in this, and many others, may prove a sure Guide.
The Twisting of the Stems to make the Grapes ripe together,
loses no Juice, and may be beneficial, if done in Season.
A very ingenious French Gentleman, and another from Switzerland,
with whom I frequently converse, exclaim against that strict cutting of Vines,
the generally approved Method of France and Germany, and say,
that they were both out in their Judgment, till of late, Experience has
taught them otherwise.  Moreover, the French in North Carolina assure me,
that if we should trim our Apple and other Fruit-Trees,
as they do in Europe, we should spoil them.  As for Apples and Plums,
I have found by Experience, what they affirm to be true.  The French,
from the Mannakin Town on the Freshes of James River in Virginia,
had, for the most part, removed themselves to Carolina, to live there,
before I came away; and the rest were following, as their Minister,
(Monsieur Philip de Rixbourg) told me, who was at Bath-Town,
when I was taking my leave of my Friends.  He assur'd me, that their Intent
was to propagate Vines, as far as their present Circumstances would permit;
provided they could get any Slips of Vines, that would do.  At the same time,
I had gotten some Grape-Seed, which was of the Jesuits white Grape
from Madera.  The Seed came up very plentifully, and, I hope,
will not degenerate, which if it happens not to do, the Seed may prove
the best way to raise a Vineyard, as certainly it is most easy
for Transportation.  Yet I reckon we should have our Seed from a Country,
where the Grape arrives to the utmost Perfection of Ripeness.
These French Refugees have had small Encouragement in Virginia,
because, at their first coming over, they took their Measures of Living,
from Europe; which was all wrong; for the small Quantities of ten,
fifteen, and twenty Acres to a Family did not hold out according to
their way of Reckoning, by Reason they made very little or no Fodder;
and the Winter there being much harder than with us, their Cattle fail'd;
chiefly, because the English took up and survey'd all the Land
round about them; so that they were hemm'd in on all Hands
from providing more Land for themselves or their Children,
all which is highly prejudicial in America, where the generality
are bred up to Planting.  One of these French Men being a Fowling,
shot a Fowl in the River, upon which his Dog went down the Bank
to bring it to his Master; but the Bank was so high and steep,
that he could not get up again.  Thereupon, the French Man went down,
to help his Dog up, and breaking the Mould away, accidentally, with his Feet,
he discover'd a very rich Coal-Mine.  This Adventure he gave an Account of
amongst the Neighbourhood, and presently one of the Gentlemen of that Part
survey'd the Land, and the poor French Man got nothing by his Discovery.
The French are good Neighbours amongst us, and give Examples of Industry,
which is much wanted in this Country.  They make good Flax, Hemp,
Linnen-Cloth and Thread; which they exchange amongst the Neighbourhood
for other Commodities, for which they have occasion.

We have hitherto made no Tryal of foreign Herbage; but, doubtless,
it would thrive well; especially, Sanfoin, and those Grasses,
that endure Heat, and dry Grounds.  As for our Low Lands, such as Marshes,
Savannas and Percoarson-Ground, which lies low, all of them naturally afford
good Land for Pasturage.

We will next treat of the Beasts, which you shall have an Account of,
as they have been discover'd.



          The Beasts of Carolina are the

    Buffelo, or wild Beef.
    Bear.
    Panther.
    Cat-a-mount.
    Wild Cat.
    Wolf.
    Tyger.
    Polcat.
    Otter.
    Bever.
    Musk-Rat.
    Possum.
    Raccoon.
    Minx.
    Water-Rat.
    Rabbet, two sorts.
    Elks.
    Stags.
    Fallow-Deer.
    Squirrel, four sorts.
    Fox.
    Lion, and Jackall on the Lake.
    Rats, two sorts.
    Mice, two sorts.
    Moles.
    Weasel, Dormouse.
    Bearmouse.


The Buffelo is a wild Beast of America, which has a Bunch on his Back,
as the Cattle of St. Laurence are said to have.  He seldom appears
amongst the English Inhabitants, his chief Haunt being
in the Land of Messiasippi, which is, for the most part, a plain Country;
yet I have known some kill'd on the Hilly Part of Cape-Fair-River,
they passing the Ledges of vast Mountains from the said Messiasippi,
before they can come near us.  {Two killed one year in Virginia
at Appamaticks.}  I have eaten of their Meat, but do not think it so good
as our Beef; yet the younger Calves are cry'd up for excellent Food,
as very likely they may be.  It is conjectured, that these Buffelos,
mixt in Breed with our tame Cattle, would much better the Breed
for Largeness and Milk, which seems very probable.  Of the wild Bull's Skin,
Buff is made.  The Indians cut the Skins into Quarters
for the Ease of their Transportation, and make Beds to lie on.
They spin the Hair into Garters, Girdles, Sashes, and the like,
it being long and curled, and often of a chesnut or red Colour.
These Monsters are found to weigh (as I am informed by a Traveller of Credit)
from 1600 to 2400 Weight.

{Bear.}
The Bears here are very common, though not so large as in Greenland,
and the more Northern Countries of Russia.  The Flesh of this Beast
is very good, and nourishing, and not inferiour to the best Pork in Taste.
It stands betwixt Beef and Pork, and the young Cubs are a Dish
for the greatest Epicure living.  I prefer their Flesh before any Beef,
Veal, Pork, or Mutton; and they look as well as they eat,
their fat being as white as Snow, and the sweetest of any Creature's
in the World.  If a Man drink a Quart thereof melted,
it never will rise in his Stomach.  We prefer it above all things,
to fry Fish and other things in.  Those that are Strangers to it,
may judge otherwise; But I who have eaten a great deal of Bears Flesh
in my Life-time (since my being an Inhabitant in America)
do think it equalizes, if not excels, any Meat I ever eat in Europe.
The Bacon made thereof is extraordinary Meat; but it must be well saved,
otherwise it will rust.  This Creature feeds upon all sorts of wild Fruits.
When Herrings run, which is in March, the Flesh of such of those Bears
as eat thereof, is nought, all that Season, and eats filthily.
Neither is it good, when he feeds on Gum-berries, as I intimated before.
They are great Devourers of Acorns, and oftentimes meet the Swine
in the Woods, which they kill and eat, especially when they are hungry,
and can find no other Food.  Now and then they get into
the Fields of Indian Corn, or Maiz, where they make a sad Havock,
spoiling ten times as much as they eat.  The Potatos of this Country
are so agreeable to them, that they never fail to sweep 'em all clean,
if they chance to come in their way.  They are seemingly
a very clumsy Creature, yet are very nimble in running up Trees,
and traversing every Limb thereof.  When they come down,
they run Tail foremost.  At catching of Herrings, they are
most expert Fishers.  They sit by the Creek-sides, (which are very narrow)
where the Fish run in; and there they take them up, as fast as it's possible
they can dip their Paws into the Water.  There is one thing more
to be consider'd of this Creature, which is, that no Man,
either Christian or Indian, has ever kill'd a She-bear with Young.

It is supposed, that the She-Bears, after Conception, hide themselves
in some secret and undiscoverable Place, till they bring forth their Young,
which, in all Probability, cannot be long; otherwise, the Indians,
who hunt the Woods like Dogs, would, at some time or other,
have found them out.  Bear-Hunting is a great Sport in America,
both with the English and Indians.  Some Years ago, there were kill'd
five hundred Bears, in two Counties of Virginia, in one Winter;
and but two She-Bears amongst them all, which were not with Young,
as I told you of the rest.  The English have a breed of Dogs
fit for this sport, about the size of Farmers Curs, and, by Practice,
come to know the Scent of a Bear, which as soon as they have found,
they run him, by the Nose, till they come up with him,
and then bark and snap at him, till he trees, when the Huntsman shoots him
out of the Trees, there being, for the most part, two or three with Guns,
lest the first should miss, or not quite kill him.  Though they are not
naturally voracious, yet they are very fierce when wounded.
The Dogs often bring him to a Bay, when wounded, and then the Huntsmen
make other Shots, perhaps with the Pistols that are stuck in their Girdles.
If a Dog is apt to fasten, and run into a Bear, he is not good,
for the best Dog in Europe is nothing in their Paws; but if ever
they get him in their Clutches, they blow his Skin from his Flesh,
like a Bladder, and often kill him; or if he recovers it, he is never good
for any thing after.  As the Paws of this Creature, are held for the best bit
about him, so is the Head esteem'd the worst, and always thrown away,
for what reason I know not.  I believe, none ever made Trial thereof,
to know how it eats.  The Oil of the Bear is very Sovereign for Strains,
Aches, and old Pains.  The fine Fur at the bottom of the Belly, is used
for making Hats, in some places.  The Fur itself is fit for several Uses;
as for making Muffs, facing Caps, &c. but the black Cub-skin is preferable
to all sorts of that kind, for Muffs.  Its Grain is like Hog-Skin.

{Panther.}
The Panther is of the Cat's kind; about the height of a very large Greyhound
of a reddish Colour, the same as a Lion.  He climbs Trees
with the greatest Agility imaginable, is very strong-limb'd,
catching a piece of Meat from any Creature he strikes at.
His Tail is exceeding long; his Eyes look very fierce and lively,
are large, and of a grayish Colour; his Prey is, Swines-flesh, Deer,
or any thing he can take; no Creature is so nice and clean, as this,
in his Food.  When he has got his Prey, he fills his Belly with the Slaughter,
and carefully lays up the Remainder, covering it very neatly with Leaves,
which if any thing touches, he never eats any more of it.
He purrs as Cats do; if taken when Young, is never to be reclaim'd
from his wild Nature.  He hollows like a Man in the Woods, when kill'd,
which is by making him take a Tree, as the least Cur will presently do;
then the Huntsmen shoot him; if they do not kill him outright,
he is a dangerous Enemy, when wounded, especially to the Dogs
that approach him.  This Beast is the greatest Enemy to the Planter,
of any Vermine in Carolina.  His Flesh looks as well
as any Shambles-Meat whatsoever; a great many People eat him, as choice Food;
but I never tasted of a Panther, so cannot commend the Meat,
by my own Experience.  His Skin is a warm Covering for the Indians
in Winter, though not esteem'd amongst the choice Furs.  This Skin dress'd,
makes fine Womens Shooes, or Mens Gloves.

{Cat-a-Mount.}
The Mountain-Cat, so call'd, because he lives in the Mountainous Parts
of America.  He is a Beast of Prey, as the Panther is, and nearest to him
in Bigness and Nature.

{Wild Cat.}
This Cat is quite different from those in Europe; being more
nimble and fierce, and larger; his Tail does not exceed four Inches.
He makes a very odd sort of Cry in the Woods, in the Night.
He is spotted as the Leopard is, tho' some of them are not,
(which may happen, when their Furs are out of Season)
he climbs a Tree very dexterously, and preys as the Panther does.
He is a great Destroyer of young Swine.  I knew an Island,
which was possess'd by these Vermine, unknown to the Planter,
who put thereon a considerable Stock of Swine; but never took one back;
for the wild Cats destroy'd them all.  He takes most of his Prey by Surprize,
getting up the Trees, which they pass by or under, and thence leaping
directly upon them.  Thus he takes Deer (which he cannot catch by running)
and fastens his Teeth into their Shoulders and sucks them.
They run with him, till they fall down for want of strength,
and become a Prey to the Enemy.  Hares, Birds, and all he meets,
that he can conquer, he destroys.  The Fur is approv'd to wear
as a Stomacher, for weak and cold Stomachs.  They are likewise used
to line Muffs, and Coats withal, in cold Climates.

{Wolf.}
The Wolf of Carolina, is the Dog of the Woods.  The Indians had
no other Curs, before the Christians came amongst them.
They are made domestick.  When wild, they are neither so large, nor fierce,
as the European Wolf.  They are not Man-slayers; neither is any Creature
in Carolina, unless wounded.  They go in great Droves in the Night,
to hunt Deer, which they do as well as the best Pack of Hounds.
Nay, one of these will hunt down a Deer.  They are often so poor,
that they can hardly run.  When they catch no Prey, they go to a Swamp,
and fill their Belly full of Mud; if afterwards they chance
to get any thing of Flesh, they will disgorge the Mud, and eat the other.
When they hunt in the Night, that there is a great many together,
they make the most hideous and frightful Noise, that ever was heard.
The Fur makes good Muffs.  The Skin dress'd to a Parchment
makes the best Drum-Heads, and if tann'd makes the best sort of Shooes
for the Summer-Countries.

{Tyger.}
Tygers are never met withal in the Settlement; but are more to the Westward,
and are not numerous on this Side the Chain of Mountains.  I once saw one,
that was larger that a Panther, and seem'd to be a very bold Creature.
The Indians that hunt in those Quarters, say, they are seldom met withal.
It seems to differ from the Tyger of Asia and Africa.

{Polcat.}
Polcats or Skunks in America, are different from those in Europe.
They are thicker, and of a great many Colours; not all alike,
but each differing from another in the particular Colour.
They smell like a Fox, but ten times stronger.  When a Dog encounters them,
they piss upon him, and he will not be sweet again in a Fortnight or more.
The Indians love to eat their Flesh, which has no manner of ill Smell,
when the Bladder is out.  I know no use their Furs are put to.
They are easily brought up tame.

{Otters.}
There have been seen some Otters from the Westward of Carolina,
which were of a white Colour, a little inclining to a yellow.
They live on the same Prey here, as in Europe, and are the same
in all other Respects; so I shall insist no farther on that Creature.
Their Furs, if black, are valuable.

{Bevers.}
Bevers are very numerous in Carolina, their being abundance of their Dams
in all Parts of the Country, where I have travel'd.  They are the most
industrious and greatest Artificers (in building their Dams and Houses)
of any four-footed Creatures in the World.  Their Food is chiefly
the Barks of Trees and Shrubs, viz. Sassafras, Ash, Sweet-Gum,
and several others.  If you take them young, they become
very tame and domestick, but are very mischievous in spoiling Orchards,
by breaking the Trees, and blocking up your Doors in the Night,
with the Sticks and Wood they bring thither.  If they eat any thing
that is salt, it kills them.  Their Flesh is a sweet Food;
especially, their Tail, which is held very dainty.  Their Fore-Feet are open,
like a Dog's; their Hind-Feet webb'd like a Water-Fowl's.
The Skins are good Furs for several Uses, which every one knows.
The Leather is very thick; I have known Shooes made thereof in Carolina,
which lasted well.  It makes the best Hedgers Mittens that can be used.

{Musk Rat.}
Musk Rats frequent fresh Streams and no other; as the Bever does.
He has a Cod of Musk, which is valuable, as is likewise his Fur.

{Possum.}
The Possum is found no where but in America.  He is the Wonder
of all the Land Animals, being the size of a Badger, and near that Colour.
The Male's Pizzle is placed retrograde; and in time of Coition,
they differ from all other Animals, turning Tail to Tail,
as Dog and Bitch when ty'd.  The Female, doubtless, breeds her Young
at her Teats; for I have seen them stick fast thereto, when they have been
no bigger than a small Rasberry, and seemingly inanimate.
She has a Paunch, or false Belly, wherein she carries her Young,
after they are from those Teats, till they can shift for themselves.
Their Food is Roots, Poultry, or wild Fruits.  They have no Hair
on their Tails, but a sort of a Scale, or hard Crust, as the Bevers have.
If a Cat has nine Lives, this Creature surely has nineteen;
for if you break every Bone in their Skin, and mash their Skull,
leaving them for Dead, you may come an hour after, and they will be
gone quite away, or perhaps you meet them creeping away.
They are a very stupid Creature, utterly neglecting their Safety.
They are most like Rats of any thing.  I have, for Necessity
in the Wilderness, eaten of them.  Their Flesh is very white,
and well tasted; but their ugly Tails put me out of Conceit with that Fare.
They climb Trees, as the Raccoons do.  Their Fur is not esteem'd nor used,
save that the Indians spin it into Girdles and Garters.

{Raccoon.}
The Raccoon is of a dark-gray Colour; if taken young, is easily made tame,
but is the drunkenest Creature living, if he can get any Liquor
that is sweet and strong.  They are rather more unlucky than a Monkey.
When wild, they are very subtle in catching their Prey.
Those that live in the Salt-Water, feed much on Oysters which they love.
They watch the Oyster when it opens, and nimbly put in their Paw,
and pluck out the Fish.  Sometimes the Oyster shuts, and holds fast their Paw
till the Tide comes in, that they are drown'd, tho' they swim very well.
The way that this Animal catches Crabs, which he greatly admires,
and which are plenty in Carolina, is worthy of Remark.
When he intends to make a Prey of these Fish, he goes to a Marsh,
where standing on the Land, he lets his Tail hang in the Water.
This the Crab takes for a Bait, and fastens his Claws therein,
which as soon as the Raccoon perceives, he, of a sudden, springs forward,
a considerable way, on the Land, and brings the Crab along with him.
As soon as the Fish finds himself out of his Element, he presently
lets go his hold; and then the Raccoon encounters him, by getting him
cross-wise in his Mouth, and devours him.  There is a sort of small Land-Crab,
which we call a Fiddler, that runs into a Hole when any thing pursues him.
This Crab the Raccoon takes by putting his Fore-Foot in the Hole,
and pulling him out.  With a tame Raccoon, this Sport is very diverting.
The Chief of his other Food is all sorts of wild Fruits, green Corn,
and such as the Bear delights in.  This and the Possum
are much of a Bigness.  The Fur makes good Hats and Linings.
The Skin dress'd makes fine Womens Shooes.

{Minx.}
The Minx is an Animal much like the English Fillimart or Polcat.
He is long, slender, and every way shap'd like him.  His Haunts are chiefly
in the Marshes, by the Sea-side and Salt-Waters, where he lives on Fish, Fowl,
Mice, and Insects.  They are bold Thieves, and will steal any thing from you
in the Night, when asleep, as I can tell by Experience; for one Winter,
by Misfortune, I ran my Vessel a-ground, and went often to the Banks,
to kill wild Fowl, which we did a great many.  One Night, we had a mind
to sleep on the Banks (the Weather being fair) and wrapt up the Geese
which we had kill'd, and not eaten, very carefully, in the Sail of a Canoe,
and folded it several Doubles, and for their better Security,
laid 'em all Night under my Head.  In the Morning when I wak'd,
a Minx had eaten thro' every Fold of the Canoe's Sail,
and thro' one of the Geese, most part of which was gone.
These are likewise found high up in the Rivers, in whose sides they live;
which is known by the abundance of Fresh-Water Muscle-Shells
(such as you have in England) that lie at the Mouth of their Holes.
This is an Enemy to the Tortois, whose Holes in the Sand,
where they hide their Eggs, the Minx finds out, and scratches up and eats.
The Raccoons and Crows do the same.  The Minx may be made domestick,
and were it not for his paying a Visit now and then to the Poultry,
they are the greatest Destroyers of Rats and Mice, that are in the World.
Their Skins, if good of that kind, are valuable, provided they are kill'd
in Season.

{Water-Rats.}
The Water-Rat is found here the same as in England.  The Water-Snakes
are often found to have of these Rats in their Bellies.

{Coneys.}
That which the People of Carolina call a Hare, is nothing but a Hedge-Coney.
They never borough in the Ground, but much frequent Marshes and Meadow-Land.
They hide their Young in some Place secure from the Discovery of the Buck,
as the European Rabbets do, and are of the same Colour;
but if you start one of them, and pursue her, she takes into a hollow Tree,
and there runs up as far as she can, in which Case the Hunter makes a Fire,
and smoaks the Tree, which brings her down, and smothers her.
At one time of the Year, great Bots or Maggots breed betwixt
the Skin and the Flesh of these Creatures.  They eat just as
the English ones do; but I never saw one of them fat.  We fire the Marshes,
and then kill abundance.

{Rabbet English.}
The English, or European Coneys are here found, tho' but in one place
that I ever knew of, which was in Trent-River, where they borough'd
among the Rocks.  I cannot believe, these are Natives of the Country,
any otherwise than that they might come from aboard some Wreck;
the Sea not being far off.  I was told of several that were upon
Bodies Island by Ronoak, which came from that Ship of Bodies;
but I never saw any.  However the Banks are no proper Abode of Safety,
because of the many Minxes in those Quarters.  I carried over
some of the tame sort from England to South-Carolina,
which bred three times going over, we having a long Passage.
I turn'd them loose in a Plantation, and the young ones,
and some of the old ones bred great Maggots in their Testicles.  At last,
the great Gust in September, 1700, brought a great deal of Rain,
and drown'd them all in their Holes.  I intend to make a second Tryal of them
in North Carolina, and doubt not but to secure them.

{Elks.}
The Elk is a Monster of the Venison sort.  His Skin is used
almost in the same Nature as the Buffelo's.  Some take him
for the red Deer of America; but he is not:  For, if brought and kept
in Company with one of that sort, of the contrary Sex, he will never couple.
His Flesh is not so sweet as the lesser Deers.  His Horns exceed (in Weight)
all Creatures which the new World affords.  They will often resort and feed
with the Buffelo, delighting in the same Range as they do.

{Stags.}
The Stags of Carolina are lodg'd in the Mountains.  They are not so large
as in Europe, but much larger than any Fallow-Deer.  They are always fat,
I believe, with some delicate Herbage that grows on the Hills;
for we find all Creatures that graze much fatter and better Meat on the Hills,
than those in the Valleys:  I mean towards and near the Sea.
Some Deer on these Mountains afford the occidental Bezoar,
not coming from a Goat, as some report.  What sort of Beast affords
the oriental Bezoar, I know not.  The Tallow of the Harts
make incomparable Candles.  Their Horns and Hides are of the same Value,
as others of their kind.

{Fallow-Deer.}
Fallow-Deer in Carolina, are taller and longer-legg'd, than in Europe;
but neither run so fast, nor are so well haunch'd.  Their Singles are
much longer, and their Horns stand forward, as the others incline backward;
neither do they beam, or bear their Antlers, as the English Deer do.
Towards the Salts, they are not generally so fat and good Meat,
as on the Hills.  I have known some kill'd on the Salts in January,
that have had abundance of Bots in their Throat, which keep them very poor.
As the Summer approaches, these Bots come out, and turn into
the finest Butterfly imaginable, being very large, and having black, white,
and yellow Stripes.  Deer-Skins are one of the best Commodities
Carolina affords, to ship off for England, provided they be large.

{Fox Squirrel.}
Of Squirrels we have four Sorts.  The first is the Fox-Squirrel,
so call'd, because of his large Size, which is the Bigness of a Rabbet
of two or three Months old.  His Colour is commonly gray;
yet I have seen several pied ones, and some reddish, and black;
his chiefest Haunts are in the Piny Land, where the Almond-Pine grows.
There he provides his Winter-Store; they being a Nut
that never fails of bearing.  He may be made tame, and is very good Meat,
when killed.

{Small gray Squirrel.}
The next sort of Squirrel is much of the Nature of the English,
only differing in Colour.  Their Food is Nuts (of all sorts
the Country affords) and Acorns.  They eat well; and, like the Bear,
are never found with young.

{Flying-Squirrel.}
This Squirrel is gray, as well as the others.  He is the least of the Three.
His Food is much the same with the small gray Squirrels.  He has not Wings,
as Birds or Bats have, there being a fine thin Skin cover'd with Hair,
as the rest of the parts are.  This is from the Fore-Feet to the Hinder-Feet,
which is extended and holds so much Air, as buoys him up,
from one Tree to another, that are greater distances asunder,
than other Squirrels can reach by jumping or springing.  He is made very tame,
is an Enemy to a Cornfield, (as all Squirrels are) and eats only
the germinating Eye of that Grain, which is very sweet.

{Ground Squirrel.}
Ground Squirrels are so call'd, because they never delight
in running up Trees, and leaping from Tree to Tree.  They are
the smallest of all Squirrels.  Their Tail is neither so long not bushy;
but flattish.  They are of a reddish Colour, and striped down each Side
with black Rows, which make them very beautiful.  They may be kept tame,
in a little Box with Cotton.  They and the Flying-Squirrels seldom stir out
in Cold Weather, being tender Animals.

{Fox.}
The Fox of Carolina is gray, but smells not as the Foxes
in Great-Britain, and elsewhere.  They have reddish Hair about their Ears,
and are generally very fat; yet I never saw any one eat them.
When hunted, they make a sorry Chace, because they run up Trees, when pursued.
They are never to be made familiar and tame, as the Raccoon is.
Their Furs, if in Season, are used for Muffs and other Ornaments.
They live chiefly on Birds and Fowls, and such small Prey.

{Supposed Lion and Jackall.}
I have been inform'd by the Indians, that on a Lake of Water
towards the Head of Neus River, there haunts a Creature,
which frightens them all from Hunting thereabouts.  They say,
he is the Colour of a Panther, but cannot run up Trees;
and that there abides with him a Creature like an Englishman's Dog,
which runs faster than he can, and gets his Prey for him.  They add,
that there is no other of that Kind that ever they met withal;
and that they have no other way to avoid him, but by running up a Tree.
The Certainty of this I cannot affirm by my own Knowledge,
yet they all agree in this Story.  As for Lions, I never saw any in America;
neither can I imagine, how they should come there.

{Rats.}
Of Rats we have two sorts; the House-Rat, as in Europe; and the Marsh-Rat,
which differs very much from the other, being more hairy,
and has several other Distinctions, too long here to name.

{Mice.}
Mice are the same here, as those in England, that belong to the House.
There is one sort that poisons a Cat, as soon as she eats of them,
which has sometimes happen'd.  These Mice resort not to Houses.

{Dormouse.}
The Dormouse is the same as in England; and so is the Weasel,
which is very scarce.

{Rearmouse.}
The Bat or Rearmouse, the same as in England.  The Indian Children
are much addicted to eat Dirt, and so are some of the Christians.
But roast a Bat on a Skewer, then pull the Skin off, and make the Child
that eats Dirt, eat the roasted Rearmouse; and he will never eat Dirt again.
This is held as an infallible Remedy.  I have put this amongst the Beasts,
as partaking of both Natures; of the Bird, and Mouse-Kind.

Having mention'd all the sorts of terrestrial or Land-Animals,
which Carolina affords and are yet known to us, except the Tame
and Domestick Creatures (of which I shall give an Account hereafter,
when I come to treat of the Ways and Manners of Agriculture in that Province)
I shall now proceed to the known Insects of that Place.
Not that I pretend to give an ample Account of the whole Tribe,
which is too numerous, and contains too great a Diversity of Species,
many not yet discovered, and others that have slipt my Memory at present;
But those which I can remember, I here present my Readers withal.



          Insects of Carolina.

    Allegators.
    Rattle-Snakes.
    Ground Rattle-Snakes.
    Horn-Snakes.
    Water-Snakes, four sorts.
    Swamp Snakes three sorts.
    Red-bellied Land-Snakes.
    Red-back'd Snake.
    Black Truncheon Snake.
    Scorpion-Lizard.
    Green Lizard.
    Frogs, many sorts.
    Long black Snake.
    King-Snake.
    Green Snake.
    Corn Snake.
    Vipers black and gray.
    Tortois.
    Terebin Land and Water.
    Brimstone-Snake.
    Egg, or Chicken-Snake.
    Eel-Snake, or great Loach.
    Brown Lizard.
    Rotten-wood Worm, &c.


{Strange Genitors.}
The Allegator is the same, as the Crocodile, and differs only in Name.
They frequent the sides of Rivers, in the Banks of which they make
their Dwellings a great way under Ground; the Hole or Mouth of their Dens
lying commonly two Foot under Water, after which it rises
till it be considerably above the Surface thereof.  Here it is,
that this amphibious Monster dwells all the Winter, sleeping away his time
till the Spring appears, when he comes from his Cave, and daily swims
up and down the Streams.  He always breeds in some fresh Stream,
or clear Fountain of Water, yet seeks his Prey in the broad Salt Waters,
that are brackish, not on the Sea-side, where I never met with any.
He never devours Men in Carolina, but uses all ways to avoid them,
yet he kills Swine and Dogs, the former as they come to feed in the Marshes,
the others as they swim over the Creeks and Waters.  They are very mischievous
to the Wares made for taking Fish, into which they come to prey
on the Fish that are caught in the Ware, from whence they cannot
readily extricate themselves, and so break the Ware in Pieces,
being a very strong Creature.  This Animal, in these Parts,
sometimes exceeds seventeen Foot long.  It is impossible to kill them
with a Gun, unless you chance to hit them about the Eyes,
which is a much softer Place, than the rest of their impenetrable Armour.
They roar, and make a hideous Noise against bad Weather,
and before they come out of their Dens in the Spring.  I was pretty much
frightened with one of these once; which happened thus:  I had built a House
about half a Mile from an Indian Town, on the Fork of Neus-River,
where I dwelt by my self, excepting a young Indian Fellow, and a Bull-Dog,
that I had along with me.  I had not then been so long a Sojourner
in America, as to be throughly acquainted with this Creature.
One of them had got his Nest directly under my House, which stood on
pretty high Land, and by a Creek-side, in whose Banks his Entring-place was,
his Den reaching the Ground directly on which my House stood.
I was sitting alone by the Fire-side (about nine a Clock at Night,
some time in March) the Indian Fellow being gone to the Town,
to see his Relations; so that there was no body in the House
but my self and my Dog; when, all of a sudden, this ill-favour'd
Neighbour of mine, set up such a Roaring, that he made the House shake
about my Ears, and so continued, like a Bittern, (but a hundred times louder,
if possible) for four or five times.  The Dog stared, as if he was frightned
out of his Senses; nor indeed, could I imagine what it was,
having never heard one of them before.  Immediately again
I had another Lesson; and so a third.  Being at that time
amongst none but Savages, I began to suspect, they were working
some Piece of Conjuration under my House, to get away my Goods;
not but that, at another time, I have as little Faith in their,
or any others working Miracles, by diabolical Means, as any Person living.
At last, my Man came in, to whom when I had told the Story, he laugh'd at me,
and presently undeceiv'd me, by telling me what it was that made that Noise.
These Allegators lay Eggs, as the Ducks do; only they are longer shap'd,
larger, and a thicker Shell, than they have.  How long they are in hatching,
I cannot tell; but, as the Indians say, it is most part of the Summer,
they always lay by a Spring-Side, the young living in and about the same,
as soon as hatch'd.  Their Eggs are laid in Nests made in the Marshes,
and contain twenty or thirty Eggs.  Some of these Creatures afford
a great deal of Musk.  Their Tail, when cut of, looks very fair and white,
seemingly like the best of Veal.  Some People have eaten thereof, and say,
it is delicate Meat, when they happen not to be musky.  Their Flesh
is accounted proper for such as are troubled with the lame Distemper,
(a sort of Rhumatism) so is the Fat very prevailing to remove Aches and Pains,
by Unction.  The Teeth of this Creature, when dead, are taken out,
to make Chargers for Guns, being of several Sizes, fit for all Loads.
They are white, and would make pretty Snuff-Boxes, if wrought by an Artist.
After the Tail of the Allegator is separated from the Body,
it will move very freely for four days.

{Rattle-Snake.}
The Rattle-Snakes are found on all the Main of America, that I ever had
any Account of; being so call'd from the Rattle at the end of their Tails,
which is a Connexion of jointed Coverings, of an excrementitious Matter,
betwixt the Substance of a Nail, and a Horn, though each Tegmen
is very thin.  Nature seems to have design'd these, on purpose to give Warning
of such an approaching Danger, as the venomous Bite of these Snakes is.
Some of them grow to a very great Bigness, as six Foot in Length,
their Middle being the Thickness of the Small of a lusty Man's Leg.
We have an Account of much larger Serpents of this Kind;
but I never met them yet, although I have seen and kill'd abundance
in my time.  They are of an Orange, tawny, and blackish Colour, on the Back;
differing (as all Snakes do) in Colour, on the Belly; being of an Ash-Colour,
inclining to Lead.  The Male is easily distinguish'd from the Female,
by a black Velvet-Spot on his Head; and besides, his Head is smaller shaped,
and long.  Their Bite is venomous, if not speedily remedied;
especially, if the Wound be in a Vein, Nerve, Tendon, or Sinew;
when it is very difficult to cure.  The Indians are the best Physicians
for the Bite of these and all other venomous Creatures of this Country.
There are four sorts of Snake-Roots already discover'd, which Knowledge
came from the Indians, who have perform'd several great Cures.
The Rattle-Snakes are accounted the peaceablest in the World;
for they never attack any one, or injure them, unless they are trod upon,
or molested.  The most Danger of being bit by these Snakes, is for those
that survey Land in Carolina; yet I never heard of any Surveyor
that was kill'd, or hurt by them.  I have myself gone over
several of this Sort, and others; yet it pleased God, I never came
to any harm.  They have the Power, or Art (I know not which to call it)
to charm Squirrels, Hares, Partridges, or any such thing,
in such a manner, that they run directly into their Mouths.
This I have seen by a Squirrel and one of these Rattle-Snakes;
and other Snakes have, in some measure, the same Power.  The Rattle-Snakes
have many small Teeth, of which I cannot see they make any use;
for they swallow every thing whole; but the Teeth which poison, are only four;
two on each side of their Upper-Jaws.  These are bent like a Sickle,
and hang loose as if by a Joint.  Towards the setting on of these,
there is, in each Tooth, a little Hole, wherein you may just get in
the Point of a small Needle.  And here it is, that the Poison comes out,
(which is as green as Grass) and follows the Wound,
made by the Point of their Teeth.  They are much more venomous
in the Months of June and July, than they are in March,
April or September.  The hotter the Weather, the more poisonous.
Neither may we suppose, that they can renew their Poison as oft as they will;
for we have had a Person bit by one of these, who never rightly recover'd it,
and very hardly escaped with Life; a second Person bit in the same Place
by the same Snake, and receiv'd no more Harm, that if bitten with a Rat.
They cast their Skins every Year, and commonly abide near the Place
where the old Skin lies.  These cast Skins are used in Physick,
and the Rattles are reckon'd good to expedite the Birth.
The Gall is made up into Pills, with Clay, and kept for Use;
being given in Pestilential Fevers and the Small-Pox.  It is accounted
a noble Remedy, known to few, and held as a great Arcanum.
This Snake has two Nostrils on each side of his Nose.  Their Venom,
I have Reason to believe, effects no Harm, any otherwise than when
darted into the Wound by the Serpents Teeth.

{Ground Rattle-Snakes.}
The Ground Rattle-Snake, wrong nam'd, because it has nothing like Rattles.
It resembles the Rattle-Snake a little in Colour, but is darker,
and never grows to any considerable Bigness, not exceeding a Foot,
or sixteen Inches.  He is reckon'd amongst the worst of Snakes;
and stays out the longest of any Snake I know, before he returns
(in the Fall of the Leaf) to his Hole.

{Horn-Snake.}
Of the Horn-Snakes I never saw but two, that I remember.
They are like the Rattle-Snake in Colour, but rather lighter.
They hiss exactly like a Goose, when any thing approaches them.
They strike at their Enemy with their Tail, and kill whatsoever
they wound with it, which is arm'd at the End with a horny Substance,
like a Cock's Spur.  This is their Weapon.  I have heard it credibly reported,
by those who said they were Eye-Witnesses, that a small Locust-Tree,
about the Thickness of a Man's Arm, being struck by one of these Snakes,
at Ten a Clock in the Morning, then verdant and flourishing,
at four in the Afternoon was dead, and the Leaves red and wither'd.
Doubtless, be it how it will, they are very venomous.  I think,
the Indians do not pretend to cure their Wound.

{Water-Snakes.}
Of Water-Snakes there are four sorts.  The first is of the Horn-Snakes Colour,
though less.  The next is a very long Snake, differing in Colour,
and will make nothing to swim over a River a League wide.
They hang upon Birches and other Trees by the Water-Side.
I had the Fortune once to have one of them leap into my Boat,
as I was going up a narrow River; the Boat was full of Mats,
which I was glad to take out, to get rid of him.  They are reckon'd poisonous.
A third is much of an English Adder's Colour, but always
frequents the Salts, and lies under the Drift Seaweed,
where they are in abundance, and are accounted mischievous, when they bite.
The last is of a sooty black Colour, and frequents Ponds and Ditches.
What his Qualities are, I cannot tell.

{Swamp-Snakes.}
Of the Swamp-Snakes there are three sorts, which are very near akin
to the Water-Snakes, and may be rank'd amongst them.

The Belly of the first is of a Carnation or Pink Colour;
his Back a dirty brown; they are large, but have not much Venom in them,
as ever I learnt.  The next is a large Snake, of a brown Dirt Colour,
and always abides in the Marshes.

The last is mottled, and very poisonous.  They dwell in Swamps Sides,
and Ponds, and have prodigious wide Mouths, and (though not long)
arrive to the Thickness of the Calf of a Man's Leg.

{Red-Belly Land-Snakes.}
These frequent the Land altogether, and are so call'd,
because of their red Bellies, which incline to an Orange-Colour.
Some have been bitten with these sort of Snakes, and not hurt;
when others have suffer'd very much by them.  Whether there be
two sorts of these Snakes, which we make no Difference of,
I cannot at present determine.

{Red-Back Snakes.}
I never saw but one of these, which I stept over, and did not see him;
till he that brought the Chain after me, spy'd him.  He has a red Back,
as the last has a red Belly.  They are a long, slender Snake, and very rare
to be met withal.  I enquired of the Indian that was along with me,
whether they were very venomous, who made Answer, that if he had bitten me,
even the Indians could not have cured it.

{Black Truncheon-Snake.}
This sort of Snake might very well have been rank'd with the Water-Snakes.
They lie under Roots of Trees, and on the Banks of Rivers.
When any thing disturbs them, they dart into the Water (which is Salt)
like an Arrow out of a Bow.  They are thick, and the shortest Snake
I ever saw.  What Good, or Harm, there is in them, I know not.
Some of these Water-Snakes will swallow a black Land-Snake,
half as long again as themselves.

{Scorpion Lizard.}
The Scorpion Lizard, is no more like a Scorpion, than a Hedge-Hog;
but they very commonly call him a Scorpion.  He is of the Lizard Kind,
but much bigger; his Back is of a dark Copper-Colour; his Belly an Orange;
he is very nimble in running up Trees, or on the Land, and is accounted
very poisonous.  He has the most Sets of Teeth in his Mouth and Throat,
that ever I saw.

{Green Lizard.}
Green Lizards are very harmless and beautiful, having a little Bladder
under their Throat, which they fill with Wind, and evacuate the same
at Pleasure.  They are of a most glorious Green, and very tame.
They resort to the Walls of Houses in the Summer Season,
and stand gazing on a Man, without any Concern or Fear.
There are several other Colours of these Lizards; but none so beautiful
as the green ones are.

{Frogs.}
Of Frogs we have several sorts; the most famous is the Bull-Frog, so call'd,
because he lows exactly like that Beast, which makes Strangers wonder
(when by the side of a Marsh) what's the matter, for they hear the Frogs low,
and can see no Cattle; he is very large.  I believe, I have seen one
with as much Meat on him, as a Pullet, if he had been dress'd.
The small green Frogs get upon Trees, and make a Noise.  There are
several other colour'd small Frogs; but the Common Land-Frog is likest a Toad,
only he leaps, and is not poisonous.  He is a great Devourer of Ants,
and the Snakes devour him.  These Frogs baked and beat to Powder,
and taken with Orrice-Root cures a Tympany.

{Long black Snake.}
The long, black Snake frequents the Land altogether,
and is the nimblest Creature living.  His Bite has no more Venom,
than a Prick with a Pin.  He is the best Mouser that can be;
for he leaves not one of that Vermine alive, where he comes.
He also kills the Rattle-Snake, wheresoever he meets him,
by twisting his Head about the Neck of the Rattle-Snake,
and whipping him to Death with his Tail.  This Whipster haunts
the Dairies of careless Housewives, and never misses to skim the Milk
clear of the Cream.  He is an excellent Egg-Merchant,
for he does not suck the Eggs, but swallows them whole (as all Snakes do.)
He will often swallow all the Eggs from under a Hen that sits,
and coil himself under the Hen, in the Nest, where sometimes
the Housewife finds him.  This Snake, for all his Agility, is so brittle,
that when he is pursued, and gets his Head into the Hole of a Tree,
if any body gets hold of the other end, he will twist, and break himself off
in the middle.  One of these Snakes, whose Neck is no thicker
that a Woman's little Finger, will swallow a Squirrel;
so much does that part stretch, in all these Creatures.

{King Snake.}
The King-Snake is the longest of all others, and not common;
no Snake (they say) will meddle with them.  I think they are not accounted
very venomous.  The Indians make Girdles and Sashes of their Skins.

{Green Snake.}
Green-Snakes are very small, tho' pretty (if any Beauty be allow'd to Snakes.)
Every one makes himself very familiar with them, and puts them in their Bosom,
because there is no manner of Harm in them.

{Corn-Snake.}
The Corn-Snakes are but small ones; they are of a brown Colour,
mixed with tawny.  There is no more hurt in this, than in the green Snake.

{Vipers.}
Of those we call Vipers, there are two sorts.  People call these Vipers,
because they spread a very flat Head at any time when they are vex'd.
One of these is a grayish like the Italian Viper, the other black and short;
and is reckon'd amongst the worst of Snakes, for Venom.

{Tortois.}
Tortois, vulgarly call'd Turtle; I have rank'd these among the Insects,
because they lay Eggs, and I did not know well where to put them.  Among us
there are three sorts.  The first is the green Turtle, which is not common,
but is sometimes found on our Coast.  The next is the Hawks-bill,
which is common.  These two sorts are extraordinary Meat.
The third is Logger-Head, which Kind scarce any one covets,
except it be for the Eggs, which of this and all other Turtles,
are very good Food.  None of these sorts of Creatures Eggs
will ever admit the White to be harder than a Jelly; yet the Yolk,
with boiling, becomes as hard as any other Egg.

{Terebin.}
Of Terebins there are divers sorts, all which, to be brief, we will comprehend
under the Distinction of Land and Water-Terebins.

{Land-Terebin.}
The Land-Terebin is of several Sizes, but generally Round-Mouth'd,
and not Hawks-Bill'd, as some are.  The Indians eat them.  Most of them
are good Meat, except the very large ones; and they are good Food too,
provided they are not Musky.  They are an utter Enemy to the Rattle-Snake,
for when the Terebin meets him, he catches hold of him a little below
his Neck, and draws his Head into his Shell, which makes the Snake
beat his Tail, and twist about with all the Strength and Violence imaginable,
to get away; but the Terebin soon dispatches him, and there leaves him.
These they call in Europe the Land Tortois; their Food is Snails, Tad-pools,
or young Frogs, Mushrooms, and the Dew and Slime of the Earth and Ponds.

{Water-Terebin.}
Water Terebins are small; containing about as much Meat as a Pullet,
and are extraordinary Food; especially, in May and June.
When they lay, their Eggs are very good; but they have so many Enemies
that find them out, that the hundredth part never comes to Perfection.
The Sun and Sand hatch them, which come out the Bigness of a small Chesnut,
and seek their own Living.

{Brimstone-Snake.}
We now come again to the Snakes.  The Brimstone is so call'd, I believe,
because it is almost of a Brimstone Colour.  They might as well
have call'd it a Glass-Snake, for it is as brittle as a Tobacco-Pipe,
so that if you give it the least Touch of a small Twigg,
it immediately breaks into several Pieces.  Some affirm,
that if you let it remain where you broke it, it will come together again.
What Harm there is in this brittle Ware, I cannot tell;
but I never knew any body hurt by them.

{Chicken-Snake.}
The Egg or Chicken-Snake is so call'd, because it is frequent about
the Hen-Yard, and eats Eggs and Chickens, they are of a dusky Soot Colour,
and will roll themselves round, and stick eighteen, or twenty Foot high,
by the side of a smooth-bark'd Pine, where there is no manner of Hold,
and there sun themselves, and sleep all the Sunny Part of the Day.
There is no great matter of Poison in them.

{Wood-Worm.}
The Wood-Worms are of a Copper, shining Colour, scarce so thick
as your little Finger; are often found in Rotten-Trees.
They are accounted venomous, in case they bite, though I never knew any thing
hurt by them.  They never exceed four or five Inches in length.

The Reptiles, or smaller Insects, are too numerous to relate here,
this Country affording innumerable Quantities thereof;
as the Flying-Stags with Horns, Beetles, Butterflies, Grashoppers,
Locust, and several hundreds of uncouth Shapes, which in the Summer-Season
are discovered here in Carolina, the Description of which
requires a large Volume, which is not my Intent at present.
Besides, what the Mountainous Part of this Land may hereafter
lay open to our View, Time and Industry will discover,
for we that have settled but a small Share of this large Province,
cannot imagine, but there will be a great number of Discoveries made
by those that shall come hereafter into the Back-part of this Land,
and make Enquiries therein, when, at least, we consider that
the Westward of Carolina is quite different in Soil, Air, Weather,
Growth of Vegetables, and several Animals too, which we at present
are wholly Strangers to, and to seek for.  As to a right Knowledge thereof,
I say, when another Age is come, the Ingenious then in being
may stand upon the Shoulders of those that went before them,
adding their own Experiments to what was delivered down to them
by their Predecessors, and then there will be something
towards a complete Natural History, which (in these days)
would be no easie Undertaking to any Author that writes
truly and compendiously, as he ought to do.  It is sufficient at present,
to write an honest and fair Account of any of the Settlements,
in this new World, without wandring out of the Path of Truth,
or bespattering any Man's Reputation any wise concern'd
in the Government of the Colony; he that mixes Invectives
with Relations of this Nature rendering himself suspected of Partiality
in whatever he writes.  For my part, I wish all well, and he that has received
any severe Dealings from the Magistrate or his Superiours,
had best examine himself well, if he was not first in the Fault; if so,
then he can justly blame none but himself for what has happen'd to him.

Having thus gone thro' the Insects, as in the Table, except the Eel-Snake,
(so call'd, though very improperly, because he is nothing but a Loach,
that sucks, and cannot bite, as the Snakes do.)  He is very large,
commonly sixteen Inches, or a Foot and half long; having all the Properties
that other Loaches have, and dwells in Pools and Waters, as they do.
Notwithstanding, we have the same Loach as you have, in Bigness.

This is all that at present I shall mention, touching the Insects,
and so go on to give an Account of the Fowls and Birds,
that are properly found in Carolina, which are these.



{Birds in America more beautiful than in Europe.}
          Birds of Carolina.

    Eagle bald.
    Eagle gray.
    Fishing Hawk.
    Turkey Buzzard, or Vulture.
    Herring-tail'd Hawk.
    Goshawk.
    Falcon.
    Merlin.
    Sparrow-hawk.
    Hobby.
    Ring-tail.
    Raven.
    Crow.
    Black Birds, two sorts.
    Buntings two sorts.
    Pheasant.
    Woodcock.
    Snipe.
    Partridge.
    Moorhen.
    Jay.
    Green Plover.
    Plover gray or whistling.
    Pigeon.
    Turtle Dove.
    Parrakeeto.
    Thrush.
    Wood-Peckers, five sorts.
    Mocking-birds, two sorts.
    Cat-Bird.
    Cuckoo.
    Blue-Bird.
    Bulfinch.
    Nightingale.
    Hedge-Sparrow.
    Wren.
    Sparrows, two sorts.
    Lark.
    Red Bird.
    East-India Bat.
    Martins, two sorts.
    Diveling, or Swift.
    Swallow.
    Humming Bird.
    The Tom-Tit, or Ox-Eye.
    Owls, two sorts.
    Scritch Owl.
    Baltimore bird.
    Throstle, no Singer.
    Whippoo Will.
    Reed Sparrow.
    Weet bird.
    Rice bird.
    Cranes and Storks.
    Snow-birds.
    Yellow-wings.


{Water Fowl.}
          Water Fowl are,

    Swans, called Trompeters.
    Swans, called Hoopers.
    Geese, three sorts.
    Brant gray.
    Brant white.
    Sea-pies or pied Curlues.
    Will Willets.
    Great Gray Gulls.
    Old Wives.
    Sea Cock.
    Curlues, three sorts.
    Coots.
    Kings-fisher.
    Loons, two sorts.
    Bitterns, three sorts.
    Hern gray.
    Hern white.
    Water Pheasant.
    Little gray Gull.
    Little Fisher, or Dipper.
    Ducks, as in England.
    Ducks black, all Summer.
    Ducks pied, build on Trees.
    Ducks whistling, at Sapona.
    Ducks scarlet-eye at Esaw.
    Blue-wings.
    Widgeon.
    Teal, two sorts.
    Shovelers.
    Whistlers.
    Black Flusterers, or bald Coot.
    Turkeys wild.
    Fishermen.
    Divers.
    Raft Fowl.
    Bull-necks.
    Redheads.
    Tropick-birds.
    Pellican.
    Cormorant.
    Gannet.
    Shear-water.
    Great black pied Gull.
    Marsh-hens.
    Blue Peter's.
    Sand-birds.
    Runners.
    Tutcocks.
    Swaddle-bills.
    Mew.
    Sheldrakes.
    Bald Faces.
    Water Witch, or Ware Coot.


{Bald-Eagle.}
As the Eagle is reckon'd the King of Birds I have begun with him.
The first I shall speak of, is the bald Eagle; so call'd, because his Head,
to the middle of his Neck, and his Tail, is as white as Snow.
These Birds continually breed the Year round; for when the young Eagles
are just down'd, with a sort of white woolly Feathers, the Hen-Eagle
lays again, which Eggs are hatch'd by the Warmth of the young ones
in the Nest, so that the Flight of one Brood makes Room for the next,
that are but just hatch'd.  They prey on any living thing they can catch.
They are heavy of Flight, and cannot get their Food by Swiftness,
to help which there is a Fishawk that catches Fishes, and suffers the Eagle
to take them from her, although she is long-wing'd and a swift Flyer,
and can make far better way in her Flight than the Eagle can.  The bald Eagle
attends the Gunners in Winter, with all the Obsequiousness imaginable,
and when he shoots and kills any Fowl, the Eagle surely comes in for his Bird;
and besides, those that are wounded, and escape the Fowler,
fall to the Eagle's share.  He is an excellent Artist at stealing young Pigs,
which Prey he carries alive to his Nest, at which time the poor Pig
makes such a Noise over Head, that Strangers that have heard them cry,
and not seen the Bird and his Prey, have thought there were
Flying Sows and Pigs in that Country.  The Eagle's Nest is made of Twigs,
Sticks and Rubbish.  It is big enough to fill a handsome Carts Body,
and commonly so full of nasty Bones and Carcasses that it stinks
most offensively.  This Eagle is not bald, till he is one or two years old.

{Gray Eagle.}
The gray Eagle is altogether the same sort of Bird, as the Eagle in Europe;
therefore, we shall treat no farther of him.

{Fishing-Hawk.}
The Fishing-Hawk is the Eagle's Jackal, which most commonly
(though not always) takes his Prey for him.  He is a large Bird,
being above two thirds as big as the Eagle.  He builds his Nest
as the Eagles do; that is, in a dead Cypress-Tree, either standing in,
or hard by, the Water.  The Eagle and this Bird seldom sit on a living Tree.
He is of a gray pied Colour, and the most dexterous Fowl in Nature
at Catching of Fish, which he wholly lives on, never eating any Flesh.

{Turkey-Buzzard.}
The Turkey-Buzzard of Carolina is a small Vulture, which lives on
any dead Carcasses.  They are about the Bigness of the Fishing-Hawk,
and have a nasty Smell with them.  They are of the Kites Colour,
and are reported to be an Enemy to Snakes, by killing all they meet withal
of that Kind.

{Herring-tail'd Hawk.}
The Herring, or Swallow-tail'd Hawk, is about the Bigness of a Falcon,
but a much longer Bird.  He is of a delicate Aurora-Colour;
the Pinions of his Wings, and End of his Tail are black.
He is a very beautiful Fowl, and never appears abroad but in the Summer.
His Prey is chiefly on Snakes, and will kill the biggest we have,
with a great deal of Dexterity and Ease.

{Goshawk.}
Goshawks are very plentiful in Carolina.  They are not seemingly so large
as those from Muscovy; but appear to be a very brisk Bird.

{Falcon.}
The Falcon is much the same as in Europe, and promises to be a brave Bird,
tho' I never had any of them in my Hand; neither did I ever see any of them
in any other Posture than on the Wing, which always happen'd to be
in an Evening, and flying to the Westward; therefore, I believe,
they have their Abode and Nest among the Mountains, where we may expect
to find them, and several other Species that we are at present Strangers to.

{Merlin.}
The Merlin is a small Bird in Europe, but much smaller here;
yet he very nimbly kills the smaller sorts of Birds, and sometimes
the Partridge; if caught alive, he would be a great Rarity,
because of his Beauty and Smalness.

{Sparrow-Hawk.}
The Sparrow-Hawk in Carolina is no bigger than a Field-fare in England.
He flies at the Bush and sometimes kills a small Bird, but his chiefest Food
is Reptiles, as Beetles, Grashoppers, and such small things.
He is exactly of the same Colour, as the Sparrow-Hawk in England,
only has a blackish Hood by his Eyes.

{Hobby.}
Hobbies are the same here as in England, and are not often met withal.

{Ring Tail.}
The Ring-tail is a short-wing'd Hawk, preying on Mice, and such Vermine
in the Marshes, as in England.

{Ravens.}
Ravens, the same as in England, though very few.  I have not seen above six
in eight Years time.

{Crows.}
Crows are here less than in England.  They are as good Meat as a Pigeon;
and never feed on any Carrion.  They are great Enemies to the Corn-Fields;
and cry and build almost like Rooks.

{Black-Birds.}
Of these we have two sorts, which are the worst Vermine in America.
They fly sometimes in such Flocks, that they destroy every thing before them.
They (both sorts) build in hollow Trees, as Starlings do.  The first sort
is near as big as a Dove, and is very white and delicate Food.
The other sort is very beautiful, and about the Bigness of the Owsel.
Part of their Head, next to the Bill, and the Pinions of their Wings,
are of an Orange, and glorious Crimson Colour.  They are as good Meat
as the former, tho' very few here (where large Fowl are so plenty)
ever trouble themselves to kill or dress them.

{Bunting two sorts.}
Of the Bunting-Larks we have two sorts, though the Heel of this Bird
is not so long as in Europe.  The first of these often accompany
the Black-birds, and sing as the Bunting-Larks in England do,
differing very little.  The first sort has an Orange-Colour
on the Tops of their Wings, and are as good Meat as those in Europe.
The other sort is something less, of a lighter Colour;
nothing differing therein from those in England, as to Feathers,
Bigness, and Meat.

{Pheasant.}
The Pheasant of Carolina differs some small matter from
the English Pheasant, being not so big, and having some difference
in Feather; yet he is not any wise inferiour in Delicacy,
but is as good Meat, or rather finer.  He haunts the back Woods,
and is seldom found near the Inhabitants.

{Woodcock.}
The Woodcocks live and breed here, though they are not in great plenty,
as I have seen them in some Parts of England, and other Places.
They want one third of the English Woodcock in Bigness;
but differ not in Shape, or Feather, save that their Breast
is of a Carnation Colour; and they make a Noise (when they are on the Wing)
like the Bells about a Hawk's Legs.  They are certainly as dainty Meat,
as any in the World.  Their Abode is in all Parts of this Country,
in low, boggy Ground, Springs, Swamps, and Percoarsons.

{Snipe.}
The Snipes here frequent the same Places, as they do in England,
and differ nothing from them.  They are the only wild Bird
that is nothing different from the Species of Europe, and keeps with us
all the Year.  In some Places, there are a great many of these Snipes.

{Partridge.}
Our Partridges in Carolina, very often take upon Trees,
and have a sort of Whistle and Call, quite different from those in England.
They are a very beautiful Bird, and great Destroyers of the Pease
in Plantations; wherefore, they set Traps, and catch many of them.
They have the same Feather, as in Europe; only the Cock wants
the Horse-Shooe, in lieu of which he has a fair Half-Circle over each Eye.
These (as well as the Woodcock) are less than the European Bird;
but far finer Meat.  They might be easily transported to any Place,
because they take to eating, after caught.

{Moorhen.}
The Moorhens are of the black Game.  I am inform'd, that the gray Game
haunts the Hills.  They never come into the Settlement,
but keep in the hilly Parts.

{Jay.}
Jays are here common, and very mischievous, in devouring our Fruit,
and spoiling more than they eat.  They are abundantly more beautiful,
and finer feather'd than those in Europe, and not above half so big.

{Green-Plover.}
The Lap-wing or Green-Plover are here very common.  They cry pretty much,
as the English Plovers do; and differ not much in Feather,
but want a third of their Bigness.

{Gray-Plover.}
The gray or whistling Plover, are very scarce amongst us.
I never saw any but three times, that fell and settled on the Ground.
They differ very little from those in Europe, as far as I could discern.
I have seen several great Flocks of them fly over head; therefore, believe,
they inhabit the Valleys near the Mountains.

{Pigeons.}
Our wild Pigeons, are like the Wood-Queese or Stock-Doves,
only have a longer Tail.  They leave us in the Summer.  This sort of Pigeon
(as I said before) is the most like our Stock-Doves, or Wood-Pigeons
that we have in England; only these differ in their Tails,
which are very long, much like a Parrakeeto's?  You must understand,
that these Birds do not breed amongst us, (who are settled at,
and near the Mouths of the Rivers, as I have intimated to you before)
but come down (especially in hard Winters) amongst the Inhabitants,
in great Flocks, as they were seen to do in the Year 1707,
which was the hardest Winter that ever was known, since Carolina
has been seated by the Christians.  And if that Country had such hard Weather,
what must be expected of the severe Winters in Pensylvania, New-York,
and New-England, where Winters are ten times (if possible)
colder than with us.  Although the Flocks are, in such Extremities,
very numerous; yet they are not to be mention'd in Comparison with
the great and infinite Numbers of these Fowl, that are met withal
about a hundred, or a hundred and fifty, Miles to the Westward of the Places
where we at present live; and where these Pigeons come down, in quest of
a small sort of Acorns, which in those Parts are plentifully found.
They are the same we call Turky-Acorns, because the wild Turkies
feed very much thereon; And for the same Reason, those Trees that bear them,
are call'd Turky-Oaks.  I saw such prodigious Flocks of these Pigeons,
in January or February, 1701-2, (which were in the hilly Country,
between the great Nation of the Esaw Indians, and the pleasant Stream
of Sapona, which is the West-Branch of Clarendon, or Cape-Fair River)
that they had broke down the Limbs of a great many large Trees
all over those Woods, whereon they chanced to sit and roost;
especially the great Pines, which are a more brittle Wood,
than our sorts of Oak are.  These Pigeons, about Sun-Rise,
when we were preparing to march on our Journey, would fly by us
in such vast Flocks, that they would be near a Quarter of an Hour,
before they were all pass'd by; and as soon as that Flock was gone,
another would come; and so successively one after another,
for great part of the Morning.  It is observable, that whereever these Fowl
come in such Numbers, as I saw them then, they clear all before them,
scarce leaving one Acorn upon the Ground, which would, doubtless,
be a great Prejudice to the Planters that should seat there,
because their Swine would be thereby depriv'd of their Mast.
When I saw such Flocks of the Pigeons I now speak of, none of our Company
had any other sort of Shot, than that which is cast in Moulds,
and was so very large, that we could not put above ten or a dozen of them
into our largest Pieces; Wherefore, we made but an indifferent Hand
of shooting them; although we commonly kill'd a Pigeon for every Shot.
They were very fat, and as good Pigeons, as ever I eat.
I enquired of the Indians that dwell'd in those Parts, where it was
that those Pigeons bred, and they pointed towards the vast Ridge of Mountains,
and said, they bred there.  Now, whether they make their Nests
in the Holes in the Rocks of those Mountains, or build in Trees,
I could not learn; but they seem to me to be a Wood-Pigeon,
that build in Trees, because of their frequent sitting thereon,
and their Roosting on Trees always at Night, under which
their Dung commonly lies half a Foot thick, and kills every thing that grows
where it falls.

{Turtle Doves.}
Turtle Doves are here very plentiful; they devour the Pease; for which Reason,
People make Traps and catch them.

{Parrakeetos.}
The Parrakeetos are of a green Colour, and Orange-Colour'd
half way their Head.  Of these and the Allegators, there is none found
to the Northward of this Province.  They visit us first,
when Mulberries are ripe, which Fruit they love extremely.
They peck the Apples, to eat the Kernels, so that the Fruit rots and perishes.
They are mischievous to Orchards.  They are often taken alive, and will become
familiar and tame in two days.  They have their Nests in hollow Trees,
in low, swampy Ground.  They devour the Birch-Buds in April,
and lie hidden when the Weather is frosty and hard.

{Thrushes.}
The Thrushes in America, are the same as in England,
and red under the Wings.  They never appear amongst us but in hard Weather,
and presently leave us again.

{Wood-Peckers.}
Of Wood-peckers, we have four sorts.  The first is as big as a Pigeon,
being of a dark brown Colour, with a white Cross on his Back, his Eyes circled
with white, and on his Head stands a Tuft of beautiful Scarlet Feathers.
His Cry is heard a long way; and he flies from one rotten Tree to another,
to get Grubs, which is the Food he lives on.

{Second.}
The second sort are of an Olive-Colour, striped with yellow.  They eat Worms
as well as Grubs, and are about the Bigness of those in Europe.

{Third.}
The third is the same Bigness as the last; he is pied with black and white,
has a Crimson Head, without a Topping, and is a Plague to the Corn and Fruit;
especially the Apples.  He opens the Covering of the young Corn,
so that the Rain gets in, and rots it.

{Fourth.}
The fourth sort of these Wood-peckers, is a black and white speckled,
or mottled; the finest I ever saw.  The Cock has a red Crown;
he is not near so big as the others; his Food is Grubs, Corn,
and other creeping Insects.  He is not very wild, but will let one
come up to him, then shifts on the other side the Tree,
from your sight; and so dodges you for a long time together.
He is about the size of an English Lark.

{Mocking-Birds.}
The Mocking-Bird is about as big as a Throstle in England, but longer;
they are of a white, and gray Colour, and are held to be
the Choristers of America, as indeed they are.  They sing with
the greatest Diversity of Notes, that is possible for a Bird to change to.
They may be bred up, and will sing with us tame in Cages;
yet I never take any of their Nests, altho' they build yearly
in my Fruit-Trees, because I have their Company, as much as if tame,
as to the singing Part.  They often sit upon our Chimneys in Summer,
there being then no Fire in them, and sing the whole Evening
and most part of the Night.  They are always attending our Dwellings;
and feed upon Mulberries and other Berries and Fruits;
especially the Mechoacan-berry, which grows here very plentifully.

{2d. sort.}
There is another sort call'd the Ground-Mocking-Bird.  She is
the same bigness, and of a Cinnamon Colour.  This Bird sings excellently well,
but is not so common amongst us as the former.

{Cat-Bird.}
The Cat-Bird, so nam'd, because it makes a Noise exactly like young Cats.
They have a blackish Head, and an Ash-coloured Body,
and have no other Note that I know of.  They are no bigger than a Lark,
yet will fight a Crow or any other great Bird.

{Cuckoo.}
The Cuckoo of Carolina may not properly be so call'd,
because she never uses that Cry; yet she is of the same Bigness and Feather,
and sucks the Small-Birds Eggs, as the English Cuckoo does.

{Blue-Bird.}
A Blue-Bird is the exact Bigness of a Robin-red-breast.
The Cock has the same colour'd Breast as the Robin has, and his Back,
and all the other Parts of him, are of as fine a Blue, as can possibly be seen
in any thing in the World.  He has a Cry, and a Whistle.  They hide themselves
all the Winter.

{Bulfinch.}
Bulfinches, in America, differ something from those in Europe,
in their Feathers, tho' not in their Bigness.  I never knew any one tame,
therefore know not, what they might be brought to.

{Nightingale.}
The Nightingales are different in Plumes from those in Europe.
They always frequent the low Groves, where they sing very prettily all Night.

{Hedge-Sparrow.}
Hedge-Sparrows are here, though few Hedges.  They differ scarce any thing
in Plume or Bigness, only I never heard this Whistle,
as the English one does; especially after Rain.

{Wren.}
The Wren is the same as in Europe, yet I never heard any Note she has
in Carolina.

{Sparrow.}
Sparrows here differ in Feather from the English.  We have
several Species of Birds call'd Sparrows, one of them much resembling
the Bird call'd a Corinthian Sparrow.

{Lark.}
The Lark with us resorts to the Savannas, or natural Meads,
and green Marshes.  He is colour'd and heel'd as the Lark is;
but his Breast is of a glittering fair Lemon-Colour, and he is as big
as a Fieldfare, and very fine Food.

{Red-Birds.}
The Red-Birds (whose Cock is all over of a rich Scarlet Feather,
with a tufted Crown on his Head, of the same Colour)
are the Bigness of a Bunting-Lark, and very hardy, having a strong thick Bill.
They will sing very prettily, when taken old, and put in a Cage.
They are good Birds to turn a Cage with Bells; or if taught,
as the Bulfinch is, I believe, would prove very docible.

{East-India Bats.}
East-India Bats or Musqueto Hawks, are the Bigness of a Cuckoo,
and much of the same Colour.  They are so call'd, because the same sort
is found in the East-Indies.  They appear only in the Summer,
and live on Flies, which they catch in the Air, as Gnats, Musquetos, &c.

{Martins.}
Martins are here of two sorts.  The first is the same as in England;
the other as big as a Black-Bird.  They have white Throats and Breasts,
with black Backs.  The Planters put Gourds on standing Poles,
on purpose for these Fowl to build in, because they are a very Warlike Bird,
and beat the Crows from the Plantations.

{Swift.}
The Swift, or Diveling, the same as in England.

{Swallow.}
Swallows, the same as in England.

{Humming-Bird.}
The Humming-Bird is the Miracle of all our wing'd Animals;
He is feather'd as a Bird, and gets his Living as the Bees,
by sucking the Honey from each Flower.  In some of the larger sort of Flowers,
he will bury himself, by diving to suck the bottom of it, so that
he is quite cover'd, and oftentimes Children catch them in those Flowers,
and keep them alive for five or six days.  They are of different Colours,
the Cock differing from the Hen.  The Cock is of a green, red,
Aurora, and other Colours mixt.  He is much less than a Wren,
and very nimble.  His Nest is one of the greatest Pieces of Workmanship
the whole Tribe of wing'd Animals can shew, it commonly hanging
on a single Bryar, most artificially woven, a small Hole being left
to go in and out at.  The Eggs are the Bigness of Pease.

{Tom-Tit.}
The Tom-Tit, or Ox-Eyes, as in England.

{Owls.}
Of Owls we have two sorts; the smaller sort is like ours in England;
the other sort is as big as a middling Goose, and has a prodigious Head.
They make a fearful Hollowing in the Night-time, like a Man,
whereby they often make Strangers lose their way in the Woods.

{Scritch Owls.}
Scritch Owls, much the same as in Europe.

{Baltimore-Bird.}
The Baltimore-Bird, so call'd from the Lord Baltimore,
Proprietor of all Maryland, in which Province many of them are found.
They are the Bigness of a Linnet, with yellow Wings, and beautiful
in other Colours.

{Throstle.}
Throstle, the same Size and Feather as in Europe, but I never could hear
any of them sing.

{Weet Bird.}
The Weet, so call'd because he cries always before Rain;
he resembles nearest the Fire-tail.

{Cranes and Storks.}
Cranes use the Savannas, low Ground, and Frogs; they are above five Foot-high,
when extended; are of a Cream Colour, and have a Crimson Spot
on the Crown of their Heads.  Their Quills are excellent for Pens;
their Flesh makes the best Broth, yet is very hard to digest.
Among them often frequent Storks, which are here seen, and no where besides
in America, that I have yet heard of.  The Cranes are easily
bred up tame, and are excellent in a Garden to destroy Frogs, Worms,
and other Vermine.

{Snow-Birds.}
The Snow-Birds are most numerous in the North Parts of America,
where there are great Snows.  They visit us sometimes in Carolina,
when the Weather is harder than ordinary.  They are like the Stones Smach,
or Wheat-Ears, and are delicate Meat.

{Yellow Wings.}
These Yellow-Wings are a very small Bird, of a Linnet's Colour,
but Wings as yellow as Gold.  They frequent high up in our Rivers, and Creeks,
and keep themselves in the thick Bushes, very difficult to be seen
in the Spring.  They sing very prettily.

{Whippoo-Will.}
Whippoo-Will, so nam'd, because it makes those Words exactly.
They are the Bigness of a Thrush, and call their Note under a Bush,
on the Ground, hard to be seen, though you hear them never so plain.
They are more plentiful in Virginia, than with us in Carolina;
for I never heard but one that was near the Settlement, and that was hard-by
an Indian Town.

{Red Sparrow.}
This nearest resembles a Sparrow, and is the most common Small-Bird we have,
therefore we call them so.  They are brown, and red, cinnamon Colour, striped.

{Water Fowl.}
Of the Swans we have two sorts; the one we call Trompeters;
because of a sort of trompeting Noise they make.

{Swans.}
These are the largest sort we have, which come in great Flocks in the Winter,
and stay, commonly, in the fresh Rivers till February,
that the Spring comes on, when they go to the Lakes to breed.
A Cygnet, that is, a last Year's Swan, is accounted a delicate Dish,
as indeed it is.  They are known by their Head and Feathers,
which are not so white as Old ones.

{Hooper.}
The sort of Swans call'd Hoopers, are the least.  They abide more
in the Salt-Water, and are equally valuable, for Food, with the former.
It is observable, that neither of these have a black Piece of horny Flesh
down the Head, and Bill, as they have in England.

{Wild Geese.}
Of Geese we have three sorts, differing from each other only in size.
Ours are not the common Geese that are in the Fens in England,
but the other sorts, with black Heads and Necks.

{Gray Brants.}
The gray Brant, or Barnicle, is here very plentiful, as all
other Water-Fowl are, in the Winter-Season.  They are the same
which they call Barnicles in Great-Britain, and are a very good Fowl,
and eat well.

{White Brant.}
There is also a white Brant, very plentiful in America.
This Bird is all over as white as Snow, except the Tips of his Wings,
and those are black.  They eat the Roots of Sedge and Grass
in the Marshes and Savannas, which they tear up like Hogs.
The best way to kill these Fowl is, to burn a Piece of Marsh, or Savanna,
and as soon as it is burnt, they will come in great Flocks to get the Roots,
where you kill what you please of them.  They are as good Meat as the other,
only their Feathers are stubbed, and good for little.

{Sea-Pie, or Curlue.}
The Sea-Pie, or gray Curlue, is about the Bigness of a very large Pigeon,
but longer.  He has a long Bill as other Curlues have,
which is the Colour of an English Owsel's, that is, yellow; as are his Legs.
He frequents the Sand-beaches on the Sea-side, and when kill'd,
is inferiour to no Fowl I ever eat of.

{Will Willet.}
Will Willet is so called from his Cry, which he very exactly
calls Will Willet, as he flies.  His Bill is like a Curlue's, or Woodcock's,
and has much such a Body as the other, yet not so tall.  He is good Meat.

{Great gray Gull.}
The great gray Gulls are good Meat, and as large as a Pullet.
They lay large Eggs, which are found in very great Quantities,
on the Islands in our Sound, in the Months of June, and July.
The young Squabs are very good Victuals, and often prove a Relief
to Travellers by Water, that have spent their Provisions.

{Old Wives.}
Old Wives are a black and white pied Gull with extraordinary long Wings,
and a golden colour'd Bill and Feet.  He makes a dismal Noise, as he flies,
and ever and anon dips his Bill in the Salt-Water.  I never knew him eaten.

{Sea-Cock.}
The Sea-Cock is a Gull that crows at Break of Day, and in the Morning,
exactly like a Dunghil Cock, which Cry seems very pleasant
in those uninhabited Places.  He is never eaten.

{Curlues.  Coots, Kingfisher, Loons, two sorts.}
Of Curlues there are three sorts, and vast Numbers of each.
They have all long Bills, and differ neither in Colour, nor Shape,
only in Size.  The largest is as big as a good Hen, the smaller
the Bigness of a Snipe, or something bigger.

{Bitterns, three sorts.}
We have three sorts of Bitterns in Carolina.  The first is the same
as in England; the second of a deep brown, with a great Topping,
and yellowish white Throat and Breast, and is lesser than the former;
the last is no bigger than a Wood-cock, and near the Colour of the second.

{Herns.}
We have the same Herns, as in England.

{White-Herns.}
White Herns are here very plentiful.  I have seen above thirty
sit on one Tree, at a time.  They are as white as Milk, and fly very slowly.

{Water-Pheasant.}
The Water-Pheasant (very improperly call'd so) are a Water-Fowl
of the Duck-Kind, having a Topping, of pretty Feathers, which sets them out.
They are very good Meat.

{Little gray Gull.}
The little Gray-Gull is of a curious gray Colour, and abides near the Sea.
He is about the Bigness of a Whistling-Plover, and delicate Food.

{Dipper.}
We have the little Dipper or Fisher, that catches Fish so dexterously,
the same as you have in the Islands of Scilly.

{Duck and Mallard.}
We have of the same Ducks, and Mallards with green Heads, in great Flocks.
They are accounted the coarsest sort of our Water-Fowl.

{Black Duck.}
The black Duck is full as large as the other, and good Meat.
She stays with us all the Summer, and breeds.  These are made tame by some,
and prove good Domesticks.

{Summer Duck.}
We have another Duck that stays with us all the Summer.
She has a great Topping, is pied, and very beautiful.  She builds her Nest
in a Wood-pecker's Hole, very often sixty or seventy Foot high.

{Whistling Duck.}
Towards the Mountains in the hilly Country, on the West-Branch
of Caip-Fair Inlet, we saw great Flocks of pretty pied Ducks,
that whistled as they flew, or as they fed.  I did not kill any of them.

{Scarlet Ey'd Duck.}
We kill'd a curious sort of Ducks, in the Country of the Esaw-Indians,
which were of many beautiful Colours.  Their Eyes were red,
having a red Circle of Flesh for their Eye-lids; and were very good to eat.

{Blue-Wings.}
The Blue-Wings are less than a Duck, but fine Meat.  These are the first Fowls
that appear to us in the Fall of the Leaf, coming then in great Flocks,
as we suppose, from Canada, and the Lakes that lie behind us.

{Widgeon.}
Widgeons, the same as in Europe, are here in great Plenty.

{Teal two sorts.}
We have the same Teal, as in England, and another sort
that frequents the Fresh-Water, and are always nodding their Heads.
They are smaller than the common Teal, and dainty Meat.

{Shovellers.}
Shovellers (a sort of Duck) are gray, with a black Head.
They are a very good Fowl.

{Whistlers.}
These are called Whistlers, from the whistling Noise they make, as they fly.

{Black-Flusterers, or Bald-Coot.}
Black Flusterers; some call these Old Wives.  They are as black as Ink.
The Cocks have white Faces.  They always remain in the midst of Rivers,
and feed upon drift Grass, Carnels or Sea-Nettles.  They are the fattest Fowl
I ever saw, and sometimes so heavy with Flesh, that they cannot rise
out of the Water.  They make an odd sort of Noise when they fly.
What Meat they are, I could never learn.  Some call these the great bald Coot.

{Turkeys.}
The wild Turkeys I should have spoken of, when I treated of the Land-Fowl.
There are great Flocks of these in Carolina.  I have seen about five hundred
in a Flock; some of them are very large.  I never weigh'd any myself,
but have been inform'd of one that weigh'd near sixty Pound Weight.
I have seen half a Turkey feed eight hungry Men two Meals.
Sometimes the wild breed with the tame ones, which, they reckon,
makes them very hardy, as I believe it must.  I see no manner of Difference
betwixt the wild Turkeys and the tame ones; only the wild are ever
of one Colour, (viz.) a dark gray, or brown, and are excellent Food.
They feed on Acorns, Huckle-Berries, and many other sorts of Berries
that Carolina affords.  The Eggs taken from the Nest, and hatch'd
under a Hen, will yet retain a wild Nature, and commonly leave you,
and run wild at last, and will never be got into a House to roost,
but always pearch on some high Tree, hard-by the House,
and separate themselves from the tame sort, although (at the same time)
they tread and breed together.  I have been inform'd, that if you take
these wild Eggs, when just on the point of being hatch'd,
and dip them (for some small time) in a Bowl of Milk-warm Water,
it will take off their wild Nature, and make them as tame and domestick
as the others.  Some Indians have brought these wild Breed hatch'd at home,
to be a Decoy to bring others to roost near their Cabins,
which they have shot.  But to return to the Water-Fowl.

{Fishermen.}
Fishermen are like a Duck, but have a narrow Bill, with Setts of Teeth.
They live on very small Fish, which they catch as they swim along.
They taste Fishy.  The best way to order them, is, upon occasion,
to pull out the Oil-Box from the Rump, and then bury them five or six Hours
under Ground.  Then they become tolerable.

{Divers.}
Of Divers there are two sorts; the one pied, the other gray; both good Meat.

{Raft-Fowl.}
Raft-Fowl includes all the sorts of small Ducks and Teal,
that go in Rafts along the Shoar, and are of several sorts,
that we know no Name for.

{Bull-Necks.}
These are a whitish Fowl, about the Bigness of a Brant;
they come to us after Christmas, in very great Flocks, in all our Rivers.
They are a very good Meat, but hard to kill, because hard to come near.
They will dive and endure a great deal of Shot.

{Red-Heads.}
Red-Heads, a lesser Fowl than Bull-Necks, are very sweet Food,
and plentiful in our Rivers and Creeks.

{Tropick-Birds.}
Tropick-Birds are a white Mew, with a forked Tail.  They are so call'd,
because they are plentifully met withal under the Tropicks, and thereabouts.

{Pellican.}
The Pellican of the Wilderness cannot be the same as ours;
this being a Water-Fowl, with a great natural Wen or Pouch under his Throat,
in which he keeps his Prey of Fish, which is what he lives on.
He is Web-footed, like a Goose, and shap'd like a Duck,
but is a very large Fowl, bigger than a Goose.  He is never eaten as Food;
They make Tobacco-pouches of his Maw.

{Cormorant.}
Cormorants are very well known in some Parts of England;
we have great Flocks of them with us, especially against the Herrings run,
which is in March and April; then they sit upon Logs of dry Wood
in the Water, and catch the Fish.

{Gannet.}
The Gannet is a large white Fowl, having one Part of his Wings black;
he lives on Fish, as the Pellican.  His Fat or Grease,
is as yellow as Saffron, and the best thing known, to preserve Fire-Arms,
from Rust.

{Shear-Water.}
Shear-Waters are a longer Fowl than a Duck; some of them lie on the Coast,
whilst others range the Seas all over.  Sometimes they are met
five hundred Leagues from Land.  They live without drinking any fresh Water.

{Pied-Gull.}
We have a great pied Gull, black and white, which seems to have a black Hood
on his Head; these lay very fair Eggs which are good; as are the young ones
in the Season.

{Marsh-Hen.}
Marsh-Hen, much the same as in Europe, only she makes another sort of Noise,
and much shriller.

{Blue-Peters.}
The same as you call Water-Hens in England, are here very numerous,
and not regarded for eating.

{Sand-Birds.}
The Sand-Birds are about the Bigness of a Lark, and frequent our Sand-Beaches;
they are a dainty Food, if you will bestow Time and Ammunition to kill them.

{Runners.}
These are called Runners; because if you run after them,
they will run along the Sands and not offer to get up;
so that you may often drive them together to shoot as you please.
They are a pleasant small Bird.

{Tutcocks.}
A sort of Snipe, but sucks not his Food; they are almost the same
as in England.

{Swaddle-Bills.}
Swaddle-Bills are a sort of an ash-colour'd Duck, which have
an extraordinary broad Bill, and are good Meat; they are not common
as the others are.

{Mew.}
The same Mew as in England, being a white, slender Bird, with red Feet.

{Shel-Drakes.}
The same as in England.

{Bald-Faces.}
The bald, or white Faces are a good Fowl.  They cannot dive,
and are easily shotten.

{Water-Witch.}
Water-Witch, or Ware-Coots, are a Fowl with Down and no Feathers;
they dive incomparably, so that no Fowler can hit them.
They can neither fly, nor go; but get into the Fish-wares,
and cannot fly over the Rods, and so are taken.

Thus have we given an Account of what Fowl has come to our Knowledge,
since our Abode in Carolina; except some that, perhaps,
have slipt our Memory, and so are left out of our Catalogue.
Proceed we now to treat of the Inhabitants of the Watry Element,
which tho' we can as yet do but very imperfectly; yet we are willing
to oblige the Curious with the best Account that is in our Power
to present them withal.



          The Fish in the salt, and fresh Waters of Carolina, are,

    Whales, several sorts.
    Thrashers.
    Divel-Fish.
    Sword-Fish.
    Crampois.
    Bottle-Noses.
    Porpoises.
    Sharks, two sorts.
    Dog-Fish.
    Spanish-Mackarel.
    Cavallies.
    Boneto's.
    Blue-Fish.
    Drum, red.
    Drum-Fish, black.
    Angel-Fish.
    Bass, or Rock-Fish.
    Sheeps-Heads.
    Plaice.
    Flounder.
    Soles.
    Mullets.
    Shad.
    Eat-Backs.
    Guard, white.
    Guard, green.
    Scate or Stingray.
    Thornback.
    Congar-Eels.
    Lamprey-Eels.
    Eels.
    Sun-Fish.
    Toad-Fish.
    Sea-Tench.
    Trouts of the Salt Water.
    Crocus.
    Herring.
    Smelts.
    Shads.
    Breams.
    Taylors.


          Fresh-Water Fish are,

    Sturgeon.
    Pike.
    Trouts.
    Gudgeon.
    Pearch English.
    Pearch, white.
    Pearch, brown, or Welch-men.
    Pearch, flat, and mottled, or Irishmen.
    Pearch small and flat, with red Spots, call'd round Robins.
    Carp.
    Roach.
    Dace.
    Loaches.
    Sucking-Fish.
    Cat-Fish.
    Grindals.
    Old-Wives.
    Fountain-Fish.
    White-Fish.


          The Shell-Fish are.

    Large Crabs, call'd Stone-Crabs.
    Smaller flat Crabs.
    Oysters great and small.
    Cockles.
    Clams.
    Muscles.
    Conks.
    Skellop.
    Man of Noses.
    Periwinkles, or Wilks.
    Sea-Snail-Horns.
    Fidlars.
    Runners.
    Spanish or Pearl-Oysters.
    Flattings.
    Tortois and Terebin, accounted for among the Insects.
    Finger-Fish.
    Shrimps.

        Fresh Water.
    Craw-Fish.
    Muscles.


{Whale.}
Whales are very numerous, on the Coast of North Carolina,
from which they make Oil, Bone, &c. to the great Advantage of those
inhabiting the Sand-Banks, along the Ocean, where these Whales come ashore,
none being struck or kill'd with a Harpoon in this Place,
as they are to the Northward, and elsewhere; all those Fish being found dead
on the Shoar, most commonly by those that inhabit the Banks, and Sea-side,
where they dwell, for that Intent, and for the Benefit of Wrecks,
which sometimes fall in upon that Shoar.

Of these Monsters there are four sorts; the first, which is most
choice and rich, is the Sperma Caeti Whale, from which the Sperma Caeti
is taken.  These are rich Prizes; but I never heard but of one found
on this Coast, which was near Currituck-Inlet.

The other sorts are of a prodigious Bigness.  Of these the Bone and Oil
is made; the Oil being the Blubber, or oily Flesh, or Fat of that Fish boil'd.
These differ not only in Colour, some being pied, others not,
but very much in shape, one being call'd a Bottle-Nosed Whale,
the other a Shovel-Nose, which is as different as a Salmon from a Sturgeon.
These Fish seldom come ashoar with their Tongues in their Heads,
the Thrasher (which is the Whale's mortal Enemy, wheresoever he meets him)
eating that out of his Head, as soon as he and the Sword-Fish have kill'd him.
For when the Whale-catchers (in other Parts) kill any of these Fish,
they eat the Tongue, and esteem it an excellent Dish.

There is another sort of these Whales, or great Fish,
though not common.  I never knew of above one of that sort,
found on the Coast of North Carolina, and he was contrary, in Shape,
to all others ever found before him; being sixty Foot in Length,
and not above three or four Foot Diameter.  Some Indians in America
will go out to Sea, and get upon a Whales Back, and peg or plug up his Spouts,
and so kill him.

{Thrashers.}
The Thrashers are large Fish, and mortal Enemies to the Whale,
as I said before.  They make good Oil; but are seldom found.

{Divel-Fish.}
The Divel-Fish lies at some of our Inlets, and, as near as I can describe him,
is shap'd like a Scate, or Stingray; only he has on his Head
a Pair of very thick strong Horns, and is of a monstrous Size, and Strength;
for this Fish has been known to weigh a Sloop's Anchor,
and run with the Vessel a League or two, and bring her back, against Tide,
to almost the same Place.  Doubtless, they may afford good Oil;
but I have no Experience of any Profits which arise from them.

{Sword-Fish.}
The Sword-Fish is the other of the Whale's Enemies, and joins
with the Thrasher to destroy that Monster.  After they have overcome him,
they eat his Tongue, as I said before, and the Whale drives ashoar.

{Crampois.}
Crampois is a large Fish, and by some accounted a young Whale;
but it is not so; neither is it more than twenty five or thirty Foot long.
They spout as the Whale does, and when taken yield good Oil.

{Bottle-Noses.}
Bottle-Noses are between the Crampois and Porpois, and lie near the Soundings.
They are never seen to swim leisurely, as sometimes all other Fish do,
but are continually running after their Prey in Great Shoals,
like wild Horses, leaping now and then above the Water.  The French
esteem them good Food, and eat them both fresh and salt.

{Porpoises.}
Porpoises are frequent, all over the Ocean and Rivers that are salt;
nay, we have a Fresh-Water Lake in the great Sound of North Carolina
that has Porpoises in it.  And several sorts of other unknown Fish,
as the Indians say, that we are wholly Strangers to.  As to the Porpoises,
they make good Oil; they prey upon other Fish as Drums, yet never are known
to take a Bait, so as to be catch'd with a Hook.

{Sharks.}
Of these there are two sorts; one call'd Paracooda-Noses;
the other Shovel-Noses; they cannot take their Prey before
they turn themselves on their Backs; wherefore some Negro's,
and others, that can swim and dive well, go naked into the Water,
with a Knife in their Hand, and fight the Shark, and very commonly kill him,
or wound him so, that he turns Tail, and runs away.  Their Livors make
good Oil to dress Leather withal; the Bones found in their Head
are said to hasten the Birth, and ease the Stone, by bringing it away.
Their Meat is eaten in scarce times; but I never could away with it,
though a great Lover of Fish.  Their Back-Bone is of one entire Thickness.
Of the Bones, or Joints, I have known Buttons made, which serve well enough
in scarce Times, and remote Places.

{Dog-Fish.}
The Dog-Fish are a small sort of the Shark Kind; and are caught
with Hook and Line, fishing for Drums.  They say, they are good Meat;
but we have so many other sorts of delicate Fish, that I shall hardly ever
make Tryal what they are.

{Spanish-Mackarel.}
Spanish Mackarel are, in Colour and Shape, like the common Mackarel,
only much thicker.  They are caught with Hook and Line at the Inlets,
and sometimes out a little way at Sea.  They are a very fine hard Fish,
and of good Taste.  They are about two Foot long, or better.

{Cavallies.}
Cavallies are taken in the same Places.  They are of a brownish Colour,
have exceeding small Scales, and a very thick Skin; they are as firm a Fish
as ever I saw; therefore will keep sweet (in the hot Weather) two days,
when others will stink in half a day, unless salted.  They ought to be scaled
as soon as taken; otherwise you must pull off the Skin and Scales,
when boiled; the Skin being the choicest of the Fish.  The Meat,
which is white and large, is dress'd with this Fish.

{Boneto's.}
Boneto's are a very palatable Fish, and near a Yard long.
They haunt the Inlets and Water near the Ocean; and are killed
with the Harpoon, and Fishgig.

{Blue-Fish.}
The Blue Fish is one of our best Fishes, and always very fat.
They are as long as a Salmon, and indeed, I think, full as good Meat.
These Fish come (in the Fall of the Year) generally after
there has been one black Frost, when there appear great Shoals of them.
The Hatteras Indians, and others, run into the Sands of the Sea,
and strike them, though some of these Fish have caused
Sickness and violent Burnings after eating of them, which is found
to proceed from the Gall that is broken in some of them, and is hurtful.
Sometimes, many Cart-loads of these are thrown and left dry on the Sea side,
which comes by their eager Pursuit of the small Fish,
in which they run themselves ashoar, and the Tide leaving them,
they cannot recover the Water again.  They are called Blue-Fish,
because they are of that Colour, and have a forked Tail,
and are shaped like a Dolphin.

{Red-Drum.}
The Red Drum is a large Fish much bigger than the Blue-Fish.  The Body of this
is good firm Meat, but the Head is beyond all the Fish I ever met withal
for an excellent Dish.  We have greater Numbers of these Fish,
than of any other sort.  People go down and catch as many Barrels full
as they please, with Hook and Line, especially every young Flood,
when they bite.  These are salted up, and transported to other Colonies,
that are bare of Provisions.

{Black-Drum.}
Black Drums are a thicker-made Fish than the Red Drum,
being shap'd like a fat Pig; they are a very good Fish,
but not so common with us as to the Northward.

{Angel-Fish.}
The Angel-Fish is shaped like an English Bream.  He is so call'd,
from his golden Colour, which shines all about his Head and Belly.
This is accounted a very good Fish, as are most in these Parts.
The Bermudians have the same sort of Fish, and esteem them very much.

{Rock-Fish.}
Bass or Rock is both in Salt and Fresh-Water; when young,
he much resembles a Grayling, but grows to the size of the large Cod-Fish.
They are a very good firm Fish.  Their Heads are souced,
and make a noble Dish, if large.

{Sheeps-Head.}
Sheeps-Head has the general Vogue of being the choicest Fish in this Place.
Indeed, it is a very delicate Fish, and well relish'd; yet I think,
there are several others full as good as the Sheeps-Head.
He is much of the Bigness of the Angel-Fish, and flat as he is;
they sometimes weigh two or three Pound Weight.  This Fish hath Teeth
like a Sheep, and is therefore so call'd.

{Plaice.}
Plaice are here very large, and plentiful, being the same as in England.

{Flounder.}
Flounders should have gone amongst the Fresh-Water Fish,
because they are caught there, in great Plenty.

{Soles.}
Soles are a Fish we have but lately discover'd; they are as good,
as in any other Part.

{Mullets.}
Mullets, the same as in England, and great Plenty in all Places
where the Water is salt or brackish.

{Shads.}
Shads are a sweet Fish, but very bony; they are very plentiful
at some Seasons.

{Fat-Backs.}
Fat-Backs are a small Fish, like Mullets, but the fattest ever known.
They put nothing into the Pan, to fry these.  They are excellent sweet Food.

{White Guard-Fish.}
The white Guard-Fish is shaped almost like a Pike, but slenderer;
his Mouth has a long small Bill set with Teeth, in which he catches
small Fish; his Scales are knit together like Armour.  When they dress him,
they strip him, taking off Scales and Skin together.  His Meat is very white,
and rather looks like Flesh than Fish.  The English account them
no good Fish; but the Indians do.  The Gall of this Fish is green,
and a violent Cathartick, if taken inwardly.

{Green-Guard.}
The green Guard is shaped, in all respects, like the other,
save that his Scales are very small and fine.  He is indifferent good Meat;
his Bones, when boil'd or fry'd, remain as green as Grass.
The same sort of Fish come before the Mackarel in England.

{Scate.}
Scate, or Stingray, the same as in England, and very common;
but the great Plenty of other Fish makes these not regarded;
for few or none eat them in Carolina, though they are almost
at every ones Door.

{Thornback.}
Thornbacks are the same as in England.  They are not so common
as the Scate and Whip-Rays.

{Congar-Eels.}
Congar-Eels always remain in the Salt-Water; they are much more known
in the Northward Parts of America, than with us.

{Lamprey.}
Lampreys are not common; I never saw but one, which was large,
and caught by the Indians, in a Ware.  They would not eat him,
but gave him to me.

{Eels.}
Eels are no where in the World better, or more plentiful, than in Carolina.

{Sun-Fish.}
Sun-Fish are flat and rounder than a Bream, and are reckon'd
a fine-tasted Fish, and not without Reason.  They are much
the size of Angel-Fish.

{Toad-Fish.}
Toad-Fish are nothing but a Skin full of Prickles, and a few Bones;
they are as ugly as a Toad, and preserv'd to look upon,
and good for nothing else.

{Sea-Tench.}
They are taken by a Bait, near the Inlet, or out at Sea a little way.
They are blackish, and exactly like a Tench, except in the Back-fins,
which have Prickles like a Pearch.  They are as good, if not better
than any Tench.

{Salt-Water Trouts.}
Trouts of the Salt-Water are exactly shaped like the Trouts in Europe,
having blackish, not red Spots.  They are in the Salts,
and are not red within, but white, yet a very good Fish.  They are so tender,
that if they are in or near fresh Water, and a sudden Frost come,
they are benumm'd, and float on the Surface of the Water, as if dead;
and then they take up Canoe-Loads of them.  If you put them into warm Water,
they presently recover.

{Crocus.}
The Crocus is a Fish, in Shape like a Pearch, and in Taste like a Whiting.
They croke and make a Noise in your Hand, when taken with Hook or Net.
They are very good.

{Herring.}
The Herrings in Carolina are not so large as in Europe.
They spawn there in March and April, running up the fresh Rivers
and small fresh Runs of Water in great Shoals, where they are taken.
They become red if salted; and, drest with Vinegar and Oil,
resemble an Anchovy very much; for they are far beyond an English Herring,
when pickled.

{Smelts.}
The same as in England; they lie down a great way in the Sound,
towards the Ocean, where (at some certain Seasons) are a great many
very fine ones.

{Breams.}
The fresh Water affords no such Bream as in England, that I have
as yet discover'd; yet there is a Sea-Bream, which is a flat and thin Fish,
as the European Breams are.

{Taylors.}
The Taylor is a Fish about the Bigness of a Trout, but of
a bluish and green Colour, with a forked Tail, as a Mackarel has.
They are a delicate Fish, and plentiful in our Salt-Waters.
Infinite numbers of other Species will be hereafter discover'd
as yet unknown to us; although I have seen and eaten of several other
sorts of Fish, which are not here mention'd, because, as yet,
they have no certain Names assign'd them.  Therefore, I shall treat no farther
of our Salt-Water Fish, but proceed to the Fresh.

{Fresh Water Sturgeon.}
The first of these is the Sturgeon, of which we have Plenty,
all the fresh Parts of our Rivers being well stor'd therewith.
The Indians upon and towards the Heads and Falls of our Rivers,
strike a great many of these, and eat them; yet the Indians
near the Salt-Waters will not eat them.  I have seen an Indian
strike one of these Fish, seven Foot long, and leave him on the Sands
to be eaten by the Gulls.  In May, they run up towards
the Heads of the Rivers, where you see several hundreds of them in one day.
The Indians have another way to take them, which is by Nets
at the end of a Pole.  The Bones of these Fish make good Nutmeg-Graters.

{Pike.}
The Jack, Pike, or Pickerel, is exactly the same, in Carolina,
as they are in England.  Indeed, I never saw this Fish so big and large
in America, as I have in Europe, these with us being seldom
above two Foot long, as far as I have yet seen.  They are very plentiful
with us in Carolina, all our Creeks and Ponds being full of them.
I once took out of a Ware, above three hundred of these Fish, at a time.

{Trouts.}
The same in England as in Carolina; but ours are a great way up
the Rivers and Brooks, that are fresh, having swift Currents,
and stony, and gravelly Bottoms.

{Gudgeon.}
The same Gudgeons as in Europe are found in America.

{First Pearch.}
The same sort of Pearch as are in England, we have likewise in Carolina,
though, I think, ours never rise to be so large as in England.

{Second Pearch.}
We have a white Pearch, so call'd, because he is of a Silver Colour,
otherwise like the English Pearch.  These we have in great Plenty,
and they are preferable to the red ones.

{Third Pearch.}
The brown Pearch, which some call Welch-men, are the largest
sort of Pearches that we have, and very firm, white and sweet Fish.
These grow to be larger than any Carp, and are very frequent
in every Creek and Pond.

{Fourth flat.}
The flat or mottled Pearch are shaped almost like a Bream.
They are called Irish-men, being freckled or mottled with black,
and blue Spots.  They are never taken any where, but in the fresh Water.
They are good Fish; but I do not approve of them, no more
than of the other sorts of Pearch.

{Fifth Pearch, or Round Robin.}
We have another sort of Pearch, which is the least sort of all,
but as good Meat as any.  These are distinguish'd from the other sorts,
by the Name of Round-Robins; being flat, and very round-shap'd;
they are spotted with red Spots very beautiful, and are easily caught
with an Angle, as all the other sort of Pearches are.

{Carp.}
We have the same Carp as you have in England.

{Roach.}
And the same Roach; only scarce so large.

{Dace.}
Dace are the same as yours too; but neither are these so large nor plentiful,
as with you.

{Loach.}
The same as in England.

{Sucking-Fish.}
Sucking-Fish are the nearest in Taste and Shape to a Barbel,
only they have no Barbs.

{Cat-Fish.}
Cat-Fish are a round blackish Fish, with a great flat Head, a wide Mouth,
and no Scales; they something resemble Eels in Taste.  Both this sort,
and another that frequents the Salt Water, are very plentiful.

{Grindals.}
Grindals are a long scaled Fish with small Eyes; and frequent Ponds, Lakes,
and slow-running Creeks and Swamps.  They are a soft sorry Fish,
and good for nothing; though some eat them for good Fish.

{Old-Wives.}
These are a bright scaly Fish, which frequent the Swamps, and fresh Runs;
they seem to be between an English Roach and a Bream, and eat much like
the latter.  The Indians kill abundance of these, and barbakue them,
till they are crisp, then transport them, in wooden Hurdles,
to their Towns and Quarters.

{Fountain-Fish.}
The Fountain-Fish are a white sort which breed in the clear Running Springs
and Fountains of Water, where the Clearness thereof makes them very difficult
to be taken.  I cannot say how good they are; because I have not as yet
tasted of them.

{White-Fish.}
The white Fish are very large; some being two Foot and a half long and more.
They are found a great way up in the Freshes of the Rivers; and are firm Meat,
and an extraordinary well-relish'd Fish.

{Barbouts Millers Thumbs.}
Barbouts and Millers-Thumbs, are the very same here, in all respects,
as they are in England.  What more are in the fresh Waters
we have not discover'd, but are satisfied, that we are not acquainted
with one third part thereof; for we are told by the Indians,
of a great many strange and uncouth shapes and sorts of Fish,
which they have found in the Lakes laid down in my Chart.
However as we can give no farther Account of these than by Hear-say;
I proceed to treat of the Shell-Fish that are found in the Salt-Water,
so far as they have already come to our Knowledge.

{Large Crabs.}
The large Crabs, which we call Stone-Crabs, are the same sort
as in England, having black Tips at the end of their Claws.
These are plentifully met withal, down in Core Sound,
and the South Parts of North-Carolina.

{Small flat Crabs.}
The smaller flat Crabs I look upon to be the sweetest of all the Species.
They are the Breadth of a lusty Man's Hand, or rather larger.
These are innumerable, lying in most prodigious quantities,
all over the Salts of Carolina.  They are taken not only to eat,
but are the best Bait for all sorts of Fish, that live in the Salt-Water.
These Fish are mischievous to Night-Hooks, because they get away all the Bait
from the Hooks.

{Oysters.}
Oysters, great and small, are found almost in every Creek
and Gut of Salt-Water, and are very good and well-relish'd.
The large Oysters are excellent, pickled.

{Cockles.}
One Cockle in Carolina is as big as five or six in England.
They are often thrown upon the Sands on the Sound-Side, where the Gulls
are always ready to open and eat them.

{Clams.}
Clams are a sort of Cockles, only differing in Shell,
which is thicker and not streak'd, or ribb'd.  These are found throughout
all the Sound and Salt-Water-Ponds.  The Meat is the same for Look and Taste
as the Cockle.  These make an excellent strong Broth, and eat well,
either roasted or pickled.

{Muscles.}
The Muscles in Carolina have a very large Shell, striped with Dents.
They grow by the side of Ponds and Creeks, in Salt-Water,
wherein you may get as many of them as you please.  I do not like them so well
as the English Muscle, which is no good Shell-Fish.

{Conks.}
Some of the Shells of these are as large as a Man's Hand,
but the lesser sort are the best Meat, and those not extraordinary.
They are shap'd like the end of a Horses Yard.  Of their Shells,
the Peak or Wampum is made, which is the richest Commodity
amongst the Indians.  They breed like a long Thing shap'd like a Snake,
but containing a sort of Joints, in the Hollowness whereof
are thousands of small Coaks, no bigger then small Grains of Pepper.

{Skellops.}
The Skellops, if well dress'd, are a pretty Shell-Fish;
but to eat them only roasted, without any other Addition, in my Judgment,
are too luscious.

{Man of Noses.}
Man of Noses are a Shell-Fish commonly found amongst us.  They are valued
for increasing Vigour in Men, and making barren Women fruitful;
but I think they have no need of that Fish; for the Women in Carolina
are fruitful enough without their Helps.

{Wilks.}
Wilks, or Periwinkles, are not so large here, as in the Islands of Scilly,
and in other Parts of Europe, though very sweet.

{Snail-Horn.}
The Sea-Snail-Horn is large, and very good Meat; they are exactly shaped
as other Snail-Horns are.

{Fidlar.}
Fidlars are a sort of small Crabs, that lie in Holes in the Marshes.
The Raccoons eat them very much.  I never knew any one try,
whether they were good Meat or no.

{Runner.}
Runners live chiefly on the Sands, but sometimes run into the Sea.
They have Holes in the Sand-Beaches and are a whitish sort of a Crab.
Tho' small, they run as fast as a Man, and are good for nothing
but to look at.

{Spanish-Oysters.}
Spanish Oysters have a very thin Shell, and rough on the outside.
They are very good Shell-Fish, and so large, that half a dozen
are enow to satisfy an hungry Stomach.

{Flattings.}
The Flattings are inclosed in a broad, thin Shell, the whole Fish being flat.
They are inferiour to no Shell-Fish this Country affords.

{Finger-Fish.}
Finger-Fish are very plentiful in this Country; they are
of the Length of a Man's Finger, and lie in the Bottom of the Water
about one or two Foot deep.  They are very good.

{Shrimps.}
Shrimps are here very plentiful and good, and are to be taken
with a Small-Bow-Net, in great Quantities.

{Small-Cockles.}
The small Cockles are about the Bigness of the largest English Cockles,
and differ nothing from them, unless in the Shells, which are striped
cross-wise as well as long-wise.

The Fresh-Water Shell-Fish are,

{Muscles.}
Muscles, which are eaten by the Indians, after five or six hours Boiling,
to make them tender, and then are good for nothing.

{Craw-Fish.}
Craw-Fish, in the Brooks, and small Rivers of Water,
amongst the Tuskeruro Indians, and up higher, are found very plentifully,
and as good as any in the World.

And thus I have gone through the several Species of Fish,
so far as they have come to my Knowledge, in the eight Years
that I have lived in Carolina.  I should have made a larger Discovery,
when travelling so far towards the Mountains, and amongst the Hills,
had it not been in the Winter-Season, which was improper to make any Enquiry
into any of the Species before recited.  Therefore, as my Intent was,
I proceed to what remains of the Present State of Carolina, having already
accounted for the Animals, and Vegetables, as far as this Volume
would allow of; whereby the Remainder, though not exactly known,
may yet be guess'd at, if we consider what Latitude Carolina lies in,
which reaches from 29 to 36 deg. 30 min. Northern Latitude,
as I have before observ'd.  Which Latitude is as fertile and pleasant,
as any in the World, as well for the Produce of Minerals,
Fruit, Grain, and Wine, as other rich Commodities.  And indeed,
all the Experiments that have been made in Carolina,
of the Fertility and natural Advantages of the Country,
have exceeded all Expectation, as affording some Commodities,
which other Places, in the same Latitude, do not.  As for Minerals,
as they are subterraneous Products, so, in all new Countries,
they are the Species that are last discover'd; and especially,
in Carolina, where the Indians never look for any thing
lower than the Superficies of the Earth, being a Race of Men
the least addicted to delving of any People that inhabit so fine a Country
as Carolina is.  As good if not better Mines than those
the Spaniards possess in America, lie full West from us; and I am certain,
we have as Mountainous Land, and as great Probability of having rich Minerals
in Carolina, as any of those Parts that are already found
to be so rich therein.  But, waving this Subject, till some other Opportunity,
I shall now give you some Observations in general, concerning Carolina,
which are, first, that it lies as convenient for Trade
as any of the Plantations in America; that we have Plenty of Pitch, Tar,
Skins of Deer, and Beeves, Furs, Rice, Wheat, Rie, Indian Grain,
sundry sorts of Pulse, Turpentine, Rozin, Masts, Yards, Planks and Boards,
Staves and Lumber, Timber of many common sorts, fit for any Uses;
Hemp, Flax, Barley, Oats, Buck-Wheat, Beef, Pork, Tallow, Hides,
Whale-Bone and Oil, Wax, Cheese, Butter, &c. besides Drugs, Dyes,
Fruit, Silk, Cotton, Indico, Oil, and Wine that we need not doubt of,
as soon as we make a regular Essay, the Country being adorn'd
with pleasant Meadows, Rivers, Mountains, Valleys, Hills, and rich Pastures,
and blessed with wholesome pure Air; especially a little backwards
from the Sea, where the wild Beasts inhabit, none of which are voracious.
The Men are active, the Women fruitful to Admiration, every House
being full of Children, and several Women that have come hither barren,
having presently prov'd fruitful.  There cannot be a richer Soil;
no Place abounding more in Flesh and Fowl, both wild and tame,
besides Fish, Fruit, Grain, Cider, and many other pleasant Liquors;
together with several other Necessaries for Life and Trade,
that are daily found out, as new Discoveries are made.  The Stone and Gout
seldom trouble us; the Consumption we are wholly Strangers to,
no Place affording a better Remedy for that Distemper,
than Carolina.  For Trade, we lie so near to Virginia,
that we have the Advantage of their Convoys; as also Letters from thence,
in two or three Days at most, in some Places in as few Hours.
Add to this, that the great Number of Ships which come within those Capes,
for Virginia and Maryland, take off our Provisions,
and give us Bills of Exchange for England, which is Sterling Money.
The Planters in Virginia and Maryland are forc'd to do the same,
the great Quantities of Tobacco that are planted there,
making Provisions scarce; and Tobacco is a Commodity oftentimes so low,
as to bring nothing, whereas Provisions and Naval Stores
never fail of a Market.  Besides, where these are raised,
in such Plenty as in Carolina, there always appears good Housekeeping,
and Plenty of all manner of delicate Eatables.  For Instance,
the Pork of Carolina is very good, the younger Hogs fed on Peaches, Maiz,
and such other natural Produce; being some of the sweetest Meat
that the World affords, as is acknowledged by all Strangers
that have been there.  And as for the Beef, in Pampticough,
and the Southward Parts, it proves extraordinary.  We have not only
Provisions plentiful, but Cloaths of our own Manufactures, which are made,
and daily increase; Cotton, Wool, Hemp, and Flax, being of our own Growth;
and the Women to be highly commended for their Industry in Spinning,
and ordering their Houswifry to so great Advantage as they generally do;
which is much more easy, by reason this happy Climate,
visited with so mild Winters, is much warmer than the Northern Plantations,
which saves abundance of Cloaths; fewer serving our Necessities,
and those of our Servants.  But this is not all; for we can go out
with our Commodities, to any other Part of the West-Indies,
or elsewhere, in the Depth of Winter; whereas, those in New-England,
New-York, Pensylvania, and the Colonies to the Northward of us,
cannot stir for Ice, but are fast lock'd into their Harbours.
Besides, we can trade with South-Carolina, and pay no Duties or Customs,
no more than their own Vessels, both North and South being under
the same Lords-Proprietors.  We have, as I observ'd before,
another great Advantage, in not being a Frontier, and so continually alarm'd
by the Enemy; and what has been accounted a Detriment to us,
proves one of the greatest Advantages any People could wish; which is,
our Country's being faced with a Sound near ten Leagues over in some Places,
through which, although there be Water enough for as large Ships
to come in at, as in any part hitherto seated in both Carolinas;
yet the Difficulty of that Sound to Strangers, hinders them from attempting
any Hostilities against us; and, at the same time, if we consider
the Advantages thereof, nothing can appear to be a better Situation,
than to be fronted with such a Bulwark, which secures us from our Enemies.
Furthermore, our Distance from the Sea rids us of two Curses,
which attend most other Parts of America, viz. Muskeetos,
and the Worm-biting, which eats Ships Bottoms out; whereas at Bath-Town,
there is no such thing known; and as for Muskeetos, they hinder us
of as little Rest, as they do you in England.  Add to this,
the unaccountable Quantities of Fish this great Water, or Sound,
supplies us withal, whenever we take the Pains to fish for them;
Advantages I have no where met withal in America, except here.
As for the Climate, we enjoy a very wholsome and serene Sky,
and a pure and thin Air, the Sun seldom missing to give us his daily Blessing,
unless now and then on a Winters Day, which is not often; and when cloudy,
the first Appearance of a North-West Wind clears the Horizon,
and restores the Light of the Sun.  The Weather, in Summer, is very pleasant;
the hotter Months being refresh'd with continual Breezes of cool reviving Air;
and the Spring being as pleasant, and beautiful, as in any Place
I ever was in.  The Winter, most commonly, is so mild,
that it looks like an Autumn, being now and then attended
with clear and thin North-West Winds, that are sharp enough to regulate
English Constitutions, and free them from a great many dangerous Distempers,
that a continual Summer afflicts them withal, nothing being wanting,
as to the natural Ornaments and Blessings of a Country,
that conduce to make reasonable Men happy.  And, for those that are otherwise,
they are so much their own Enemies, where they are, that they will scarce ever
be any ones Friends, or their own, when they are transplanted;
so, it's much better for all sides, that they remain as they are.
Not but that there are several good People, that, upon just Grounds,
may be uneasy under their present Burdens; and such I would advise
to remove to the Place I have been treating of, where they may enjoy
their Liberty and Religion, and peaceably eat the Fruits of their Labour,
and drink the Wine of their own Vineyards, without the Alarms
of a troublesome worldly Life.  If a Man be a Botanist,
here is a plentiful Field of Plants to divert him in; If he be a Gardner,
and delight in that pleasant and happy Life, he will meet with
a Climate and Soil, that will further and promote his Designs,
in as great a Measure, as any Man can wish for; and as for
the Constitution of this Government, it is so mild and easy,
in respect to the Properties and Liberties of a Subject,
that without rehearsing the Particulars, I say once for all,
it is the mildest and best establish'd Government in the World,
and the Place where any Man may peaceably enjoy his own,
without being invaded by another; Rank and Superiority ever giving Place
to Justice and Equity, which is the Golden Rule that every Government
ought to be built upon, and regulated by.  Besides, it is worthy our Notice,
that this Province has been settled, and continued the most free
from the Insults and Barbarities of the Indians, of any Colony
that was ever yet seated in America; which must be esteem'd
as a particular Providence of God handed down from Heaven, to these People;
especially, when we consider, how irregularly they settled North-Carolina,
and yet how undisturb'd they have ever remain'd, free from any foreign
Danger or Loss, even to this very Day.  And what may well be look'd upon
for as great a Miracle, this is a Place, where no Malefactors are found,
deserving Death, or even a Prison for Debtors; there being no more
than two Persons, that, as far as I have been able to learn,
ever suffer'd as Criminals, although it has been a Settlement
near sixty Years; One of whom was a Turk that committed Murder;
the other, an old Woman, for Witchcraft.  These, 'tis true,
were on the Stage, and acted many Years, before I knew the Place;
but as for the last, I wish it had been undone to this day;
although they give a great many Arguments, to justifie the Deed,
which I had rather they should have a Hand in, than myself;
seeing I could never approve of taking Life away upon such Accusations,
the Justice whereof I could never yet understand.

But, to return to the Subject in Hand; we there make extraordinary good Bricks
throughout the Settlement.  All sorts of Handicrafts, as Carpenters, Joiners,
Masons, Plaisterers, Shooemakers, Tanners, Taylors, Weavers, and most others,
may, with small Beginnings, and God's Blessing, thrive very well
in this Place, and provide Estates for their Children, Land being sold
at a much cheaper Rate there, than in any other Place in America, and may,
as I suppose, be purchased of the Lords-Proprietors here in England,
or of the Governour there for the time being, by any that shall have a mind
to transport themselves to that Country.  The Farmers that go thither
(for which sort of Men it is a very thriving Place) should take with them
some particular Seeds of Grass, as Trefoil, Clover-grass all sorts,
Sanfoin, and Common Grass, or that which is a Rarity in Europe; especially,
what has sprung and rose first from a warm Climate, and will endure the Sun
without flinching.  Likewise, if there be any extraordinary sort of Grain
for Increase or Hardiness, and some Fruit-Trees of choice Kinds,
they will be both profitable and pleasant to have with you,
where you may see the Fruits of your Labour in Perfection,
in a few Years.  The necessary Instruments of Husbandry
I need not acquaint the Husbandman withal; Hoes of all sorts,
and Axes must be had, with Saws, Wedges, Augurs, Nails, Hammers,
and what other Things may be necessary for building with Brick,
or Stone, which sort your Inclination and Conveniency lead you to.
For, after having look'd over this Treatise, you must needs be acquainted
with the Nature of the Country, and therefore cannot but be Judges, what it is
that you will chiefly want.  As for Land, none need want it for taking up,
even in the Places there seated on the Navigable Creeks, Rivers, and Harbours,
without being driven into remoter Holes and Corners of the Country,
for Settlements, which all are forced to do, who, at this day,
settle in most or all of the other English Plantations in America;
which are already become so populous, that a New-Comer cannot get
a beneficial and commodious Seat, unless he purchases, when,
in most Places in Virginia and Maryland, a thousand Acres of good Land,
seated on a Navigable Water, will cost a thousand Pounds; whereas, with us,
it is at present obtain'd for the fiftieth Part of the Money.
Besides, our Land pays to the Lords, but an easy Quit-Rent,
or yearly Acknowledgement; and the other Settlements pay
two Shillings per hundred.  All these things duly weighed,
any rational Man that has a mind to purchase Land in the Plantations
for a Settlement of himself and Family, will soon discover
the Advantages that attend the Settlers and Purchasers of Land in Carolina,
above all other Colonies in the English Dominions in America.
And as there is a free Exercise of all Persuasions amongst Christians,
the Lords-Proprietors, to encourage Ministers of the Church of England,
have given free Land towards the Maintenance of a Church, and especially,
for the Parish of S. Thomas in Pampticough, over-against the Town,
is already laid out for a Glebe of two hundred and twenty three Acres
of rich well-situated Land, that a Parsonage-House may be built upon.
And now I shall proceed to give an Account of the Indians,
their Customs and Ways of Living, with a short Dictionary of their Speech.





                                      An
                                    ACCOUNT
                                    of the
                                    INDIANS
                                      of
                                NORTH-CAROLINA.



The Indians, which were the Inhabitants of America, when the Spaniards
and other Europeans discover'd the several Parts of that Country,
are the People which we reckon the Natives thereof; as indeed they were,
when we first found out those Parts, and appear'd therein.
Yet this has not wrought in me a full Satisfaction, to allow these People
to have been the Ancient Dwellers of the New-World, or Tract of Land
we call America.  The Reasons that I have to think otherwise,
are too many to set down here; but I shall give the Reader a few,
before I proceed; and some others he will find scatter'd
in my Writings elsewhere.

In Carolina (the Part I now treat of) are the fairest Marks of a Deluge,
(that at some time has probably made strange Alterations,
as to the Station that Country was then in) that ever I saw,
or, I think, read of, in any History.  {Wood under Ground.}
Amongst the other Subterraneous Matters, that have been discover'd,
we found, in digging of a Well that was twenty six foot deep,
at the Bottom thereof, many large Pieces of the Tulip-Tree,
and several other sorts of Wood, some of which were cut and notch'd,
and some squared, as the Joices of a House are, which appear'd
(in the Judgment of all that saw them) to be wrought with Iron Instruments;
it seeming impossible for any thing made of Stone, or what they were found
to make use of, to cut Wood in that manner.  It cannot be argu'd,
that the Wood so cut, might float from some other Continent;
because Hiccory and the Tulip-Tree are spontaneous in America,
and in no other Places, that I could ever learn.  {Shells some Fathoms
in the Earth, the Sea probably has thrown up in part of this Country.}
{Mexico Buildings.}  It is to be acknowledg'd, that the Spaniards
give us Relations of magnificent Buildings, which were raised
by the Indians of Mexico and other Parts, which they discover'd,
and conquer'd; amongst whom no Iron Instruments were found:
But 'tis a great Misfortune, that no Person in that Expedition was so curious,
as to take an exact Draught of the Fabricks of those People,
which would have been a Discovery of great Value, and very acceptable
to the Ingenious; for, as to the Politeness of Stones, it may be effected
by Collision, and Grinding, which is of a contrary Nature,
on several Accounts, and disproves not my Arguments, in the least.

{Earthen Pots under Ground.}
The next is, the Earthen Pots that are often found under Ground,
and at the Foot of the Banks where the Water has wash'd them away.  They are
for the most part broken in pieces; but we find them of a different sort,
in Comparison of those the Indians use at this day, who have had no other,
ever since the English discover'd America.  The Bowels of the Earth
cannot have alter'd them, since they are thicker, of another Shape,
and Composition, and nearly approach to the Urns of the Ancient Romans.

{Indian Peaches.}
Again, the Peaches, which are the only tame Fruit, or what is Foreign,
that these People enjoy, which is an Eastern Product, and will keep and retain
its vegetative and growing Faculty, the longest of any thing of that Nature,
that I know of.  {The Stone.  Water-Melon and Gourds the Indians
have always had.}  The Stone, as I elsewhere have remark'd, is thicker
than any other sort of the Peaches in Europe, or of the European sort,
now growing in America, and is observed to grow if planted,
after it has been for several Years laid by; and it seems very probable,
that these People might come from some Eastern Country; for when you ask them
whence their Fore-Fathers came, that first inhabited the Country,
they will point to the Westward and say, `Where the Sun sleeps,
our Forefathers came thence', which, at that distance, may be reckon'd
amongst the Eastern Parts of the World.  And to this day,
they are a shifting, wandring People; for I know some Indian Nations,
that have chang'd their Settlements, many hundred Miles;
sometimes no less than a thousand, as is prov'd by the Savanna Indians,
who formerly lived on the Banks of the Messiasippi, and remov'd thence
to the Head of one of the Rivers of South-Carolina; since which,
(for some Dislike) most of them are remov'd to live in the Quarters
of the Iroquois or Sinnagars, which are on the Heads of the Rivers
that disgorge themselves into the Bay of Chesapeak.  I once met
with a young Indian Woman, that had been brought from beyond the Mountains,
and was sold a Slave into Virginia.  She spoke the same Language,
as the Coranine Indians, that dwell near Cape-Look-out,
allowing for some few Words, which were different, yet no otherwise,
than that they might understand one another very well.

{Indian well shap'd People.}
The Indians of North-Carolina are a well-shap'd clean-made People,
of different Statures, as the Europeans are, yet chiefly inclin'd
to be tall.  They are a very streight People, and never bend forwards,
or stoop in the Shoulders, unless much overpower'd by old Age.
Their Limbs are exceeding well-shap'd.  As for their Legs and Feet,
they are generally the handsomest in the World.  Their Bodies are
a little flat, which is occasion'd, by being laced hard down to a Board,
in their Infancy.  This is all the Cradle they have, which I shall
describe at large elsewhere.  Their Eyes are black, or of a dark Hazle;
The White is marbled with red Streaks, which is ever common to these People,
unless when sprung from a white Father or Mother.  Their Colour is of a tawny,
which would not be so dark, did they not dawb themselves with Bears Oil,
and a Colour like burnt Cork.  This is begun in their Infancy,
and continued for a long time, which fills the Pores, and enables them better
to endure the Extremity of the Weather.  They are never bald on their Heads,
although never so old, which, I believe, proceeds from their Heads
being always uncover'd, and the greasing their Hair (so often as they do)
with Bears Fat, which is a great Nourisher of the Hair, and causes it
to grow very fast.  Amongst the Bears Oil (when they intend to be fine)
they mix a certain red Powder, that comes from a Scarlet Root which they get
in the hilly Country, near the Foot of the great Ridge of Mountains,
and it is no where else to be found.  They have this Scarlet Root
in great Esteem, and sell it for a very great Price, one to another.
The Reason of its Value is, because they not only go a long way for it,
but are in great Danger of the Sinnagars or Iroquois,
who are mortal Enemies to all our Indians, and very often
take them Captives, or kill them, before they return from this Voyage.
The Tuskeruros and other Indians have often brought this Seed
with them from the Mountains; but it would never grow in our Land.
With this and Bears Grease they anoint their Heads and Temples,
which is esteem'd as ornamental, as sweet Powder to our Hair.
Besides, this Root has the Virtue of killing Lice, and suffers none
to abide or breed in their Heads.  For want of this Root,
they sometimes use Pecoon-Root, which is of a Crimson Colour,
but it is apt to die the Hair of an ugly Hue.

Their Eyes are commonly full and manly, and their Gate sedate and majestick.
They never walk backward and forward as we do, nor contemplate
on the Affairs of Loss and Gain; the things which daily perplex us.
They are dexterous and steady both as to their Hands and Feet, to Admiration.
They will walk over deep Brooks, and Creeks, on the smallest Poles,
and that without any Fear or Concern.  Nay, an Indian will walk
on the Ridge of a Barn or House and look down the Gable-end,
and spit upon the Ground, as unconcern'd, as if he was walking
on Terra firma.  In Running, Leaping, or any such other Exercise,
their Legs seldom miscarry, and give them a Fall; and as for letting
any thing fall out of their Hands, I never yet knew one Example.
They are no Inventers of any Arts or Trades worthy mention;
the Reason of which I take to be, that they are not possess'd
with that Care and Thoughtfulness, how to provide for the Necessaries of Life,
as the Europeans are; yet they will learn any thing very soon.
I have known an Indian stock Guns better than most of our Joiners,
although he never saw one stock'd before; and besides, his Working-Tool
was only a sorry Knife.  I have also known several of them that were Slaves
to the English, learn Handicraft-Trades very well and speedily.  {No Dwarf.}
I never saw a Dwarf amongst them, nor but one that was Hump-back'd.
Their Teeth are yellow with Smoaking Tobacco, which both Men and Women
are much addicted to.  They tell us, that they had Tobacco amongst them,
before the Europeans made any Discovery of that Continent.
It differs in the Leaf from the sweet-scented, and Oroonoko,
which are the Plants we raise and cultivate in America.  {Indian Tobacco.}
Theirs differs likewise much in the Smell, when green, from our Tobacco,
before cured.  They do not use the same way to cure it as we do;
and therefore, the Difference must be very considerable in Taste;
for all Men (that know Tobacco) must allow, that it is the Ordering thereof
which gives a Hogoo to that Weed, rather than any Natural Relish it possesses,
when green.  Although they are great Smokers, yet they never are seen
to take it in Snuff, or chew it.

They have no Hairs on their Faces (except some few) and those but little,
nor is there often found any Hair under their Arm-Pits.
They are continually plucking it away from their Faces, by the Roots.
As for their Privities, since they wore Tail-Clouts,
to cover their Nakedness, several of the Men have a deal of Hair thereon.
It is to be observ'd, that the Head of the Penis is cover'd
(throughout all the Nations of the Indians I ever saw)
both in Old and Young.  Although we reckon these a very smooth People,
and free from Hair; yet I once saw a middle-aged Man, that was hairy
all down his Back; the Hairs being above an Inch long.

{Few Cripples.}
As there are found very few, or scarce any, Deformed, or Cripples,
amongst them, so neither did I ever see but one blind Man;
and then they would give me no Account how his Blindness came.
They had a Use for him, which was, to lead him with a Girl, Woman, or Boy,
by a String; so they put what Burdens they pleased upon his Back,
and made him very serviceable upon all such Occasions.  {Indians good Eyes.}
No People have better Eyes, or see better in the Night or Day,
than the Indians.  Some alledge, that the Smoke of the Pitch-Pine,
which they chiefly burn, does both preserve and strengthen the Eyes;
as, perhaps, it may do, because that Smoak never offends the Eyes,
though you hold your Face over a great Fire thereof.  This is occasion'd
by the volatile Part of the Turpentine, which rises with the Smoke,
and is of a friendly, balsamick Nature; for the Ashes of the Pine-Tree
afford no fix'd Salt in them.

{Not pair their Nails.}
They let their Nails grow very long, which, they reckon,
is the Use Nails are design'd for, and laugh at the Europeans
for pairing theirs, which, they say, disarms them of that which Nature
design'd them for.

{Indians not robust.}
They are not of so robust and strong Bodies, as to lift great Burdens,
and endure Labour and slavish Work, as the Europeans are;
yet some that are Slaves, prove very good and laborious:
{No hard Workers.}  But, of themselves, they never work as the English do,
taking care for no farther than what is absolutely necessary to support Life.
In Travelling and Hunting, they are very indefatigable;
because that carries a Pleasure along with the Profit.
I have known some of them very strong; and as for Running and Leaping,
they are extraordinary Fellows, and will dance for several Nights together,
with the greatest Briskness imaginable, their Wind never failing them.

{Indians Dance of War.  On what Account they make War.}
Their Dances are of different Natures; and for every sort of Dance,
they have a Tune, which is allotted for that Dance; as,
if it be a War-Dance, they have a warlike Song, wherein they express,
with all the Passion and Vehemence imaginable, what they intend to do
with their Enemies; how they will kill, roast, sculp, beat, and make Captive,
such and such Numbers of them; and how many they have destroy'd before.
All these Songs are made new for every Feast; nor is one and the same Song
sung at two several Festivals.  {Indian Poet.}  Some one of the Nation
(which has the best Gift of expressing their Designs) is appointed
by their King, and War-Captains, to make these Songs.

{Dance of Peace.}
Others are made for Feasts of another Nature; as, when several Towns,
or sometimes, different Nations have made Peace with one another;
then the Song suits both Nations, and relates, how the bad Spirit
made them go to War, and destroy one another; but it shall never be so again;
but that their Sons and Daughters shall marry together, and the two Nations
love one another, and become as one People.

They have a third sort of Feasts and Dances, which are always
when the Harvest of Corn is ended, and in the Spring.  The one,
to return Thanks to the good Spirit, for the Fruits of the Earth;
the other, to beg the same Blessings for the succeeding Year.
And, to encourage the young Men to labour stoutly, in planting
their Maiz and Pulse, they set a sort of an Idol in the Field,
which is dress'd up exactly like an Indian, having all the Indians Habit,
besides abundance of Wampum, and their Money, made of Shells,
that hangs about his Neck.  {Plantation Idol.}  The Image
none of the young Men dare approach; for the old ones will not suffer them
to come near him, but tell them, that he is some famous Indian Warriour,
that died a great while ago, and now is come amongst them,
to see if they work well, which if they do, he will go to the good Spirit,
and speak to him to send them Plenty of Corn, and to make the young Men
all expert Hunters and mighty Warriours.  All this while,
the King and old Men sit round the Image, and seemingly pay
a profound Respect to the same.  One great Help to these Indians,
in carrying on these Cheats, and inducing Youth to do what they please,
is, the uninterrupted Silence, which is ever kept and observ'd,
with all the Respect and Veneration imaginable.

{Masquerade.}
At these Feasts, which are set out with all the Magnificence
their Fare allows of, the Masquerades begin at Night, and not before.
There is commonly a Fire made in the middle of the House, which is the largest
in the Town, and is very often the Dwelling of their King, or War-Captain;
where sit two Men on the Ground, upon a Mat; one with a Rattle,
made of a Gourd, with some Beans in it; the other with a Drum,
made of an earthen Pot, cover'd with a dress'd-Deer-Skin,
and one Stick in his Hand to beat thereon; and so they both begin
the Song appointed.  {Indian Musicians.}  At the same time, one drums,
and the other rattles, which is all the artificial Musick of their own making
I ever saw amongst them.  To these two Instruments they sing,
which carries no Air with it, but is a sort of unsavoury Jargon;
yet their Cadences and Raising of their Voices are form'd
with that Equality and Exactness, that (to us Europeans) it seems admirable,
how they should continue these Songs, without once missing to agree,
each with the others Note and Tune.

{Dancing.}
As for their Dancing, were there Masters of that Profession amongst them,
as there are with us, they would dearly earn their Money;
for these Creatures take the most Pains at it, that Men are able to endure.
I have seen thirty odd together a dancing, and every one
dropp'd down with Sweat, as if Water had been poured down their Backs.
They use those hard Labours, to make them able to endure Fatigue,
{Indians long winded.} and improve their Wind, which indeed
is very long and durable, it being a hard matter, in any Exercise,
to dispossess them of it.

At these Feasts, they meet from all the Towns within fifty or sixty
Miles round, where they buy and sell several Commodities, as we do
at Fairs and Markets.  {Indian Gaming.}  Besides, they game very much,
and often strip one another of all they have in the World; and what is more,
I have known several of them play themselves away, so that they have
remain'd the Winners Servants, till their Relations or themselves
could pay the Money to redeem them; and when this happens,
the Loser is never dejected or melancholy at the Loss, but laughs,
and seems no less contented than if he had won.  They never differ at Gaming,
neither did I ever see a Dispute, about the Legality thereof,
so much as rise amongst them.

{Indian Cards.}
Their chiefest Game is a sort of Arithmetick, which is managed
by a Parcel of small split Reeds, the Thickness of a small Bent;
these are made very nicely, so that they part, and are tractable
in their Hands.  They are fifty one in Number, their Length
about seven Inches; when they play, they throw part of them
to their Antagonist; the Art is, to discover, upon sight, how many you have,
and what you throw to him that plays with you.  Some are so expert
at their Numbers, that they will tell ten times together,
what they throw out of their Hands.  Although the whole Play is carried on
with the quickest Motion it's possible to use, yet some are so expert
at this Game, as to win great Indian Estates by this Play.
A good Sett of these Reeds, fit to play withal, are valued and sold
for a dress'd Doe-Skin.

{Indian Dice.}
They have several other Plays and Games; as, with the Kernels or Stones
of Persimmons, which are in effect the same as our Dice,
because Winning or Losing depend on which side appear uppermost,
and how they happen to fall together.

{Indian Trap-Ball.}
Another Game is managed with a Batoon and a Ball, and resembles our Trap-ball;
besides, several Nations have several Games and Pastimes,
which are not used by others.

{Indian Cabins.}
These Savages live in Wigwams, or Cabins built of Bark, which are made round
like an Oven, to prevent any Damage by hard Gales of Wind.  They make the Fire
in the middle of the House, and have a Hole at the Top of the Roof
right above the Fire, to let out the Smoke.  These Dwellings
are as hot as Stoves, where the Indians sleep and sweat all Night.
The Floors thereof are never paved nor swept, so that they have always
a loose Earth on them.  {Fleas.}  They are often troubled
with a multitude of Fleas, especially near the Places where
they dress their Deer-Skins, because that Hair harbours them;
yet I never felt any ill, unsavory Smell in their Cabins,
whereas, should we live in our Houses, as they do, we should be poison'd
with our own Nastiness; {Indians a sweet People.} which confirms
these Indians to be, as they really are, some of the sweetest People
in the World.

The Bark they make their Cabins withal, is generally Cypress,
or red or white Cedar; and sometimes, when they are a great way
from any of these Woods, they make use of Pine-Bark, which is the worser sort.
{Making Cabins.}  In building these Fabricks, they get very long Poles,
of Pine, Cedar, Hiccory, or any Wood that will bend; these are
the Thickness of the Small of a Man's Leg, at the thickest end,
which they generally strip of the Bark, and warm them well in the Fire,
which makes them tough and fit to bend; afterwards, they stick
the thickest ends of them in the Ground, about two Yards asunder,
in a Circular Form, the distance they design the Cabin to be,
(which is not always round, but sometimes oval) then they bend the Tops
and bring them together, and bind their ends with Bark of Trees,
that is proper for that use, as Elm is, {Black Moss.} or sometimes the Moss
that grows on the Trees, and is a Yard or two long, and never rots;
then they brace them with other Poles, to make them strong; afterwards,
cover them all over with Bark, so that they are very warm and tight,
and will keep firm against all the Weathers that blow.
{Indians Store-Houses.}  They have other sorts of Cabins without Windows,
which are for their Granaries, Skins, and Merchandizes;
and others that are cover'd over head; the rest left open for the Air.
{Indians Banqueting Houses.}  These have Reed-Hurdles, like Tables,
to lie and sit on, in Summer, and serve for pleasant Banqueting-Houses
in the hot Season of the Year.  The Cabins they dwell in have Benches
all round, except where the Door stands; on these they lay Beasts-Skins,
and Mats made of Rushes, whereon they sleep and loll.  In one of these,
several Families commonly live, though all related to one another.

As to the Indians Food, it is of several sorts, which are as follows.

{Indian Food.}
Venison, and Fawns in the Bags, cut out of the Doe's Belly;
Fish of all sorts, the Lamprey-Eel excepted, and the Sturgeon
our Salt-Water Indians will not touch; Bear and Bever; Panther; Pole-cat;
Wild-cat; Possum; Raccoon; Hares, and Squirrels, roasted with their Guts in;
Snakes, all Indians will not eat them, tho' some do; All wild Fruits
that are palatable, some of which they dry and keep against Winter,
as all sort of Fruits, and Peaches, which they dry, and make Quiddonies,
and Cakes, that are very pleasant, and a little tartish;
young Wasps, when they are white in the Combs, before they can fly,
this is esteemed a Dainty; All sorts of Tortois and Terebins;
Shell-Fish, and Stingray, or Scate, dry'd; Gourds; Melons; Cucumbers;
Squashes; Pulse of all sorts; Rockahomine Meal, which is their Maiz,
parch'd and pounded into Powder; Fowl of all sorts, that are eatable;
Ground-Nuts, or wild Potato's; Acorns and Acorn Oil; Wild-Bulls, Beef,
Mutton, Pork, &c. from the English; Indian Corn, or Maiz,
made into several sorts of Bread; Ears of Corn roasted in the Summer,
or preserv'd against Winter.

The Victuals is common, throughout the whole Kindred Relations,
and often to the whole Town; especially, when they are in Hunting-Quarters,
then they all fare alike, whichsoever of them kills the Game.
{Feasts of Charity.  Indians discern not between fat and lean Meat.}
They are very kind, and charitable to one another, but more especially
to those of their own Nation; for if any one of them has suffer'd any Loss,
by Fire or otherwise, they order the griev'd Person to make a Feast,
and invite them all thereto, which, on the day appointed, they come to,
and after every Man's Mess of Victuals is dealt to him, one of their Speakers,
or grave old Men, makes an Harangue, and acquaints the Company,
That that Man's House has been burnt, wherein all his Goods were destroy'd;
That he, and his Family, very narrowly escaped; That he is every Man's Friend
in that Company; and, That it is all their Duties to help him,
as he would do to any of them, had the like Misfortune befallen them.
After this Oration is over, every Man, according to his Quality,
throws him down upon the Ground some Present, which is commonly Beads,
Ronoak, Peak, Skins or Furs, and which very often amounts to treble
the Loss he has suffer'd.  The same Assistance they give to any Man
that wants to build a Cabin, or make a Canoe.  They say, it is our Duty
thus to do; for there are several Works that one Man cannot effect,
therefore we must give him our Help, otherwise our Society will fall,
and we shall be depriv'd of those urgent Necessities which Life requires.
{Indians no Fences.}  They have no Fence to part one anothers Lots
in their Corn-Fields; but every Man knows his own, and it scarce ever happens,
that they rob one another of so much as an Ear of Corn,
which if any is found to do, he is sentenced by the Elders
to work and plant for him that was robb'd, till he is recompensed
for all the Damage he has suffer'd in his Corn-Field;
and this is punctually perform'd, and the Thief held in Disgrace,
that steals from any of his Country-Folks.  {Indians Charity to Widows.}
It often happens, that a Woman is destitute of her Husband,
and has a great many Children to maintain; such a Person they always help,
and make their young men plant, reap, and do every thing
that she is not capable of doing herself; yet they do not allow any one
to be idle, but to employ themselves in some Work or other.

{Indian Women no Scolds.}
They never fight with one another, unless drunk, nor do you ever hear
any Scolding amongst them.  They say, the Europeans are always
rangling and uneasy, and wonder they do not go out of this World, since they
are so uneasy and discontented in it.  All their Misfortunes and Losses
end in Laughter; for if their Cabins take Fire, and all their Goods
are burnt therein, (indeed, all will strive to prevent farther Damage,
whilst there is any Possibility) yet such a Misfortune ends
in a hearty Fitt of Laughter, unless some of their Kinsfolks and Friends
have lost their Lives; but then the Case is alter'd, and they become
very pensive, and go into deep Mourning, which is continued
for a considerable Time; sometimes longer, or shorter, according to
the Dignity of the Person, and the Number of Relations he had near him.

The Burial of their Dead is perform'd with a great deal of Ceremony,
in which one Nation differs, in some few Circumstances, from another,
yet not so much but we may, by a general Relation, pretty nearly account
for them all.

{Indian Burial of their Dead.}
When an Indian is dead, the greater Person he was, the more expensive
is his Funeral.  The first thing which is done, is, to place
the nearest Relations near the Corps, who mourn and weep very much,
having their Hair hanging down their Shoulders, in a very forlorn manner.
After the dead Person has lain a Day and a Night, in one of their
Hurdles of Canes, commonly in some Out-House made for that purpose,
those that officiate about the Funeral, go into the Town, and the first
young Men they meet withal, that have Blankets or Match Coats on,
whom they think fit for their Turn, they strip them from their Backs,
who suffer them so to do, without any Resistance.  In these
they wrap the dead Bodies, and cover them with two or three Mats,
which the Indians make of Rushes or Cane; and last of all,
they have a long Web of woven Reeds, or hollow Canes, which is
the Coffin of the Indians, and is brought round several times,
and tied fast at both ends, which indeed, looks very decent and well.
Then the Corps is brought out of the House, into the Orchard of Peach-Trees,
where another Hurdle is made to receive it, about which comes
all the Relations and Nation that the dead Person belong'd to,
besides several from other Nations in Alliance with them;
all which sit down on the Ground, upon Mats spread there, for that purpose;
where the Doctor or Conjurer appears; and, after some time,
makes a Sort of `O-yes', at which all are very silent; then he begins
to give an Account, who the dead Person was, and how stout a Man
he approv'd himself; how many Enemies and Captives he had kill'd and taken;
how strong, tall, and nimble he was; that he was a great Hunter,
a Lover of his Country, and possess'd of a great many beautiful
Wives and Children, esteem'd the greatest of Blessings among these Savages,
in which they have a true Notion.  {Indian Funeral Sermon.}
Thus this Orator runs on, highly extolling the dead Man,
for his Valour, Conduct, Strength, Riches, and Good-Humour;
and enumerating his Guns, Slaves and almost every thing
he was possess'd of, when living.  After which, he addresses himself
to the People of that Town or Nation, and bids them supply
the dead Man's Place, by following his steps, who, he assures them,
is gone into the Country of Souls, (which they think lies a great way off,
in this World, which the Sun visits, in his ordinary Course)
and that he will have the Enjoyment of handsome young Women,
great Store of Deer to hunt, never meet with Hunger, Cold or Fatigue,
but every thing to answer his Expectation and Desire.
This is the Heaven they propose to themselves; but, on the contrary,
for those Indians that are lazy, thievish amongst themselves,
bad Hunters, and no Warriours, nor of much Use to the Nation,
to such they allot, in the next World, Hunger, Cold, Troubles, old ugly Women
for their Companions, with Snakes, and all sorts of nasty Victuals to feed on.
Thus is mark'd out their Heaven and Hell.  {Indian Traditions.}
After all this Harangue, he diverts the People with some of their Traditions,
as when there was a violent hot Summer, or very hard Winter;
when any notable Distempers rag'd amongst them; when they were at War
with such and such Nations; how victorious they were; and what were
the Names of their War-Captains.  To prove the times more exactly,
he produces the Records of the Country, which are a Parcel of Reeds,
of different Lengths, with several distinct Marks, known to none
but themselves; by which they seem to guess, very exactly,
at Accidents that happen'd many Years ago; nay two or three Ages or more.
The Reason I have to believe what they tell me, on this Account,
is, because I have been at the Meetings of several Indian Nations;
and they agreed, in relating the same Circumstances, as to Time,
very exactly; {A hard Winter.} as, for Example, they say,
there was so hard a Winter in Carolina, 105 years ago,
that the great Sound was frozen over, and the Wild Geese came into the Woods
to eat Acorns, and that they were so tame, (I suppose, through Want)
that they kill'd abundance in the Woods, by knocking them on the Head
with Sticks.

But, to return to the dead Man.  When this long Tale is ended,
by him that spoke first; perhaps, a second begins another long Story;
so a third, and fourth, if there be so many Doctors present;
which all tell one and the same thing.  At last, the Corps is brought away
from that Hurdle to the Grave, by four young Men, attended by the Relations,
the King, old Men, and all the Nation.  {Interment in the Grave.}
When they come to the Sepulcre, which is about six Foot deep,
and eight Foot long, having at each end (that is, at the Head and Foot)
a Light-Wood, or Pitch-Pine Fork driven close down the sides of the Grave,
firmly into the Ground; (these two Forks are to contain a Ridge-Pole,
as you shall understand presently) before they lay the Corps into the Grave,
they cover the bottom two or three times over with Bark of Trees,
then they let down the Corps (with two Belts, that the Indians
carry their Burdens withal) very leisurely, upon the said Barks;
then they lay over a Pole of the same Wood, in the two Forks, and having
a great many Pieces of Pitch-Pine Logs, about two Foot and a half long,
they stick them in the sides of the Grave down each End,
and near the Top thereof, where the other Ends lie on the Ridge-Pole,
so that they are declining like the Roof of a House.  These being
very thick-plac'd, they cover them (many times double) with Bark;
then they throw the Earth thereon, that came out of the Grave,
and beat it down very firm; by this Means, the dead Body lies in a Vault,
nothing touching him; so that when I saw this way of Burial,
I was mightily pleas'd with it, esteeming it very decent and pretty,
as having seen a great many Christians buried without
the tenth Part of that Ceremony and Decency.  {Quiogozon Idols.}
Now, when the Flesh is rotted and moulder'd from the Bone,
they take up the Carcass, and clean the Bones, and joint them together;
afterwards, they dress them up in pure white dress'd Deer-Skins,
and lay them amongst their Grandees and Kings in the Quiogozon,
which is their Royal Tomb or Burial-Place of their Kings and War-Captains.
This is a very large magnificent Cabin, (according to their Building)
which is rais'd at the Publick Charge of the Nation, and maintain'd
in a great deal of Form and Neatness.  {Idols at the Beds.}
About seven foot high, is a Floor or Loft made, on which lie
all their Princes, and Great Men, that have died for several hundred Years,
all attir'd in the Dress I before told you of.  No Person is to have
his Bones lie here, and to be thus dress'd, unless he gives
a round Sum of their Money to the Rulers, for Admittance.
If they remove never so far, to live in a Foreign Country,
they never fail to take all these dead Bones along with them,
though the Tediousness of their short daily Marches keeps them never so long
on their Journey.  They reverence and adore this Quiogozon,
with all the Veneration and Respect that is possible for such a People
to discharge, and had rather lose all, than have any Violence or Injury
offer'd thereto.  These Savages differ some small matter in their Burials;
some burying right upwards, and otherwise, as you are acquainted withal
in my Journal from South to North Carolina; {Mourning for the Dead.}
Yet they all agree in their Mourning, which is, to appear every Night,
at the Sepulcre, and howl and weep in a very dismal manner, having their Faces
dawb'd over with Light-wood Soot, (which is the same as Lamp-black)
and Bears Oil.  This renders them as black as it is possible
to make themselves, so that theirs very much resemble
the Faces of Executed Men boil'd in Tar.  {Indians hired to mourn.}
If the dead Person was a Grandee, to carry on the Funeral Ceremonies,
they hire People to cry and lament over the dead Man.  Of this sort
there are several, that practise it for a Livelihood, and are very expert
at Shedding abundance of Tears, and howling like Wolves,
and so discharging their Office with abundance of Hypocrisy and Art.
The Women are never accompanied with these Ceremonies after Death;
and to what World they allot that Sex, I never understood,
unless, to wait on their dead Husbands; but they have more Wit,
than some of the Eastern Nations, who sacrifice themselves to accompany
their Husbands into the next World.  It is the dead Man's Relations, by Blood,
as his Uncles, Brothers, Sisters, Cousins, Sons, and Daughters,
that mourn in good earnest, the Wives thinking their Duty is discharg'd,
and that they are become free, when their Husband is dead;
so, as fast as they can, look out for another, to supply his Place.

{Indian Women handsome.}
As for the Indian Women, which now happen in my Way; when young,
and at Maturity, they are as fine-shap'd Creatures (take them generally)
as any in the Universe.  They are of a tawny Complexion;
their Eyes very brisk and amorous; their Smiles afford the finest Composure
a Face can possess; their Hands are of the finest Make,
with small long Fingers, and as soft as their Cheeks; and their whole Bodies
of a smooth Nature.  They are not so uncouth or unlikely, as we suppose them;
nor are they Strangers or not Proficients in the soft Passion.
They are most of them mercenary, except the married Women, who sometimes
bestow their Favours also to some or other, in their Husbands Absence.
For which they never ask any Reward.  {Married Women unconstant.}
As for the Report, that they are never found unconstant, like the Europeans,
it is wholly false; for were the old World and the new one put into
a Pair of Scales (in point of Constancy) it would be a hard Matter to discern
which was the heavier.  {Trading Girls.}  As for the Trading Girls,
which are those design'd to get Money by their Natural Parts,
these are discernable, by the Cut of their Hair; their Tonsure differing
from all others, of that Nation, who are not of their Profession;
which Method is intended to prevent Mistakes; for the Savages of America
are desirous (if possible) to keep their Wives to themselves,
as well as those in other Parts of the World.  When any Addresses are made
to one of these Girls, she immediately acquaints her Parents therewith,
and they tell the King of it, (provided he that courts her be a Stranger)
his Majesty commonly being the principal Bawd of the Nation he rules over,
and there seldom being any of these Winchester-Weddings agreed on,
without his Royal Consent.  He likewise advises her what Bargain to make,
and if it happens to be an Indian Trader that wants a Bed-fellow,
and has got Rum to sell, be sure, the King must have a large Dram for a Fee,
to confirm the Match.  These Indians, that are of the elder sort,
when any such Question is put to them, will debate the Matter
amongst themselves with all the Sobriety and Seriousness imaginable,
every one of the Girl's Relations arguing the Advantage or Detriment
that may ensue such a Night's Encounter; all which is done
with as much Steadiness and Reality, as if it was the greatest Concern
in the World, and not so much as one Person shall be seen to smile,
so long as the Debate holds, making no Difference betwixt
an Agreement of this Nature, and a Bargain of any other.  If they comply
with the Men's Desire, then a particular Bed is provided for them,
either in a Cabin by themselves, or else all the young people turn out,
to another Lodging, that they may not spoil Sport; and if the old People
are in the same Cabin along with them all Night, they lie as unconcern'd,
as if they were so many Logs of Wood.  If it be an Indian of their own
Town or Neighbourhood, that wants a Mistress, he comes to none but the Girl,
who receives what she thinks fit to ask him, and so lies all Night with him,
without the Consent of her Parents.

{Indian Traders what.}
The Indian Traders are those which travel and abide amongst the Indians
for a long space of time; sometimes for a Year, two, or three.
{Indian Wives.}  These Men have commonly their Indian Wives,
whereby they soon learn the Indian Tongue, keep a Friendship
with the Savages; and, besides the Satisfaction of a She-Bed-Fellow,
they find these Indian Girls very serviceable to them,
on Account of dressing their Victuals, and instructing 'em
in the Affairs and Customs of the Country.  Moreover, such a Man gets
a great Trade with the Savages; for when a Person that lives amongst them,
is reserv'd from the Conversation of their Women, 'tis impossible for him
ever to accomplish his Designs amongst that People.

But one great Misfortune which oftentimes attends those that converse
with these Savage Women, is, that they get Children by them,
which are seldom educated any otherwise than in a State of Infidelity;
for it is a certain Rule and Custom, amongst all the Savages of America,
that I was ever acquainted withal, to let the Children always fall
to the Woman's Lot; {Children go with the Women.} for it often happens,
that two Indians that have liv'd together, as Man and Wife,
in which Time they have had several Children; if they part,
and another Man possesses her, all the Children go along with the Mother,
and none with the Father.  And therefore, on this Score,
it ever seems impossible for the Christians to get their Children
(which they have by these Indian Women) away from them;
whereby they might bring them up in the Knowledge of the Christian Principles.
Nevertheless, we often find, that English Men, and other Europeans
that have been accustom'd to the Conversation of these savage Women,
and their Way of Living, have been so allur'd with that careless sort of Life,
as to be constant to their Indian Wife, and her Relations,
so long as they liv'd, without ever desiring to return again
amongst the English, although they had very fair Opportunities of Advantages
amongst their Countrymen; of which sort I have known several.

As for the Indian Marriages, I have read and heard of a great deal
of Form and Ceremony used, which I never saw, nor yet could learn
in the Time I have been amongst them, any otherwise than I shall here
give you an Account of; which is as follows.

{Indian Marriage.}
When any young Indian has a Mind for such a Girl to his Wife,
he, or some one for him, goes to the young Woman's Parents, if living;
if not, to her nearest Relations; where they make Offers of the Match
betwixt the Couple.  The Relations reply, they will consider of it,
which serves for a sufficient Answer, till there be a second Meeting
about the Marriage, which is generally brought into Debate
before all the Relations (that are old People) on both Sides;
and sometimes the King, with all his great Men, give their Opinions therein.
If it be agreed on, and the young Woman approve thereof, (for these Savages
never give their Children in Marriage, without their own Consent)
{Indians buy their Wives.} the Man pays so much for his Wife;
and the handsomer she is, the greater Price she bears.  Now, it often happens,
that the Man has not so much of their Money ready, as he is to pay
for his Wife; but if they know him to be a good Hunter, and that he can raise
the Sum agreed for, in some few Moons, or any little time, they agree,
she shall go along with him, as betroth'd, but he is not to have
any Knowledge of her, till the utmost Payment is discharg'd;
all which is punctually observ'd.  Thus, they lie together under one Covering
for several Months, and the Woman remains the same as she was
when she first came to him.  I doubt, our Europeans would be apt
to break this Custom, {Indian Men not vigorous.} but the Indian Men
are not so vigorous and impatient in their Love as we are.
Yet the Women are quite contrary, and those Indian Girls
that have convers'd with the English and other Europeans,
never care for the Conversation of their own Countrymen afterwards.

They never marry so near as a first Cousin; and although there is nothing
more coveted amongst them, than to marry a Woman of their own Nation,
yet when the Nation consists of a very few People (as now adays
it often happens) so that they are all of them related to one another,
then they look out for Husbands and Wives amongst Strangers.
For if an Indian lies with his Sister, or any very near Relation,
his Body is burnt, and his Ashes thrown into the River, as unworthy
to remain on Earth; yet an Indian is allow'd to marry two Sisters,
or his Brothers Wife.  Although these People are call'd Savages,
yet Sodomy is never heard of amongst them, and they are so far
from the Practice of that beastly and loathsome Sin, that they have
no Name for it in all their Language.

The Marriages of these Indians are no farther binding,
than the Man and Woman agree together.  Either of them has Liberty
to leave the other, upon any frivolous Excuse they can make;
yet whosoever takes the Woman that was another Man's before,
and bought by him, as they all are, must certainly pay to her former Husband,
whatsoever he gave for her.  Nay, if she be a Widow, and her Husband
died in Debt, whosoever takes her to Wife, pays all her Husband's Obligations,
though never so many; yet the Woman is not required to pay any thing
(unless she is willing) that was owing from her Husband, so long as she
keeps Single.  But if a Man courts her for a Nights Lodging, and obtains it,
the Creditors will make him pay her Husband's Debts, and he may,
if he will, take her for his Money, or sell her to another for his Wife.
{Selling Wives.}  I have seen several of these Bargains driven in a day;
for you may see Men selling their Wives as Men do Horses in a Fair,
a Man being allow'd not only to change as often as he pleases,
but likewise to have as many Wives as he is able to maintain.
{Indian many Wives.}  I have often seen, that very old Indian Men
(that have been Grandees in their own Nation) have had three or four
very likely young Indian Wives, which I have much wondered at, because to me
they seem'd incapacitated to make good Use of one of them.

{Night Rambles.}
The young Men will go in the Night from one House to another, to visit
the young Women, in which sort of Rambles they will spend the whole Night.
In their Addresses they find no Delays, for if she is willing
to entertain the Man, she gives him Encouragement and grants him Admittance;
otherwise she withdraws her Face from him, and says, I cannot see you,
either you or I must leave this Cabin, and sleep somewhere else this Night.

They are never to boast of their Intrigues with the Women.  If they do,
none of the Girls value them ever after, or admit of their Company
in their Beds.  This proceeds not on the score of Reputation,
for there is no such thing (on that account) known amongst them;
and although we may reckon them the greatest Libertines and most extravagant
in their Embraces, yet they retain and possess a Modesty
that requires those Passions never to be divulged.

{Trading Girls marry at last.}
The Trading Girls, after they have led that Course of Life, for several Years,
in which time they scarce ever have a Child; (for they have an Art
to destroy the Conception, and she that brings a Child in this Station,
is accounted a Fool, and her Reputation is lessen'd thereby)
at last they grow weary of so many, and betake themselves to a married State,
or to the Company of one Man; neither does their having been common to so many
any wise lessen their Fortunes, but rather augment them.

{Women not punish'd for Adultery.}
The Woman is not punish'd for Adultery, but 'tis the Man that makes
the injur'd Person Satisfaction, which is the Law of Nations
practis'd amongst them all; and he that strives to evade such Satisfaction
as the Husband demands, lives daily in Danger of his Life;
yet when discharg'd, all Animosity is laid aside, and the Cuckold
is very well pleased with his Bargain, whilst the Rival is laugh'd at
by the whole Nation, for carrying on his Intrigue with no better Conduct,
than to be discover'd and pay so dear for his Pleasure.

The Indians say, that the Woman is a weak Creature, and easily drawn away
by the Man's Persuasion; for which Reason, they lay no Blame upon her,
but the Man (that ought to be Master of his Passion) for persuading her to it.

{Never Love-mad.}
They are of a very hale Constitution; their Breaths are as sweet as the Air
they breathe in, and the Woman seems to be of that tender Composition,
as if they were design'd rather for the Bed than Bondage.  Yet their Love
is never of that Force and Continuance, that any of them ever runs Mad,
or makes away with themselves on that score.  They never love
beyond Retrieving their first Indifferency, and when slighted,
are as ready to untie the Knot at one end, as you are at the other.

Yet I knew an European Man that had a Child or two by one of these
Indian Women, and afterwards married a Christian, after which
he came to pass away a Night with his Indian Mistress;
but she made Answer that she then had forgot she ever knew him,
and that she never lay with another Woman's Husband, so fell a crying,
and took up the Child she had by him, and went out of the Cabin
(away from him) in great Disorder.

{Indian Women what they do.}
The Indian Womens Work is to cook the Victuals for the whole Family,
and to make Mats, Baskets, Girdles of Possum-Hair, and such-like.
They never plant the Corn amongst us, as they do amongst the Iroquois,
{Iroquois great Warriours.} who are always at War and Hunting;
therefore, the Plantation Work is left for the Women and Slaves to perform,
and look after; whilst they are wandring all over the Continent
betwixt the two Bays of Mexico and St. Laurence.

{Mats how made.}
The Mats the Indian Women make, are of Rushes, and about five Foot high,
and two Fathom long, and sew'd double, that is, two together;
whereby they become very commodious to lay under our Beds,
or to sleep on in the Summer Season in the Day-time, and for our Slaves
in the Night.

There are other Mats made of Flags, which the Tuskeruro Indians make,
and sell to the Inhabitants.

{Baskets.}
The Baskets our Neighbouring Indians make, are all made of a very fine
sort of Bulrushes, and sometimes of Silk-grass, which they work
with Figures of Beasts, Birds, Fishes, &c.

A great way up in the Country, both Baskets and Mats are made
of the split Reeds, which are only the outward shining Part of the Cane.
Of these I have seen Mats, Baskets, and Dressing-Boxes,
very artificially done.

{Indian Wives.}
The Savage Women of America, have very easy Travail with their Children;
sometimes they bring Twins, and are brought to bed by themselves,
when took at a Disadvantage; not but that they have Midwives amongst them,
as well as Doctors, who make it their Profession (for Gain)
to assist and deliver Women, and some of these Midwives are very knowing
in several Medicines that Carolina affords, which certainly expedite,
and make easy Births.  Besides, they are unacquainted with those severe Pains
which follow the Birth in our European Women.  Their Remedies
are a great Cause of this Easiness in that State; for the Indian Women
will run up and down the Plantation, the same day, very briskly,
and without any sign of Pain or Sickness; yet they look very meager and thin.
Not but that we must allow a great deal owing to the Climate,
and the natural Constitution of these Women, whose Course of Nature
never visits them in such Quantities, as the European Women have.
And tho' they never want Plenty of Milk, yet I never saw an Indian Woman
with very large Breasts; neither does the youngest Wife ever fail of proving
so good a Nurse, as to bring her Child up free from the Rickets and Disasters
that proceed from the Teeth, with many other Distempers
which attack our Infants in England, and other Parts of Europe.
{Nurse Children how.}  They let their Children suck till they are well grown,
unless they prove big with Child sooner.  They always nurse
their own Children themselves, unless Sickness or Death prevents.
I once saw a Nurse hired to give Suck to an Indian Woman's Child,
which you have in my Journal.  After Delivery, they absent
the Company of a Man for forty days.  As soon as the Child is born,
they wash it in cold Water at the next Stream, and then bedawb it,
as I have mention'd before.  {Cradle.}  After which, the Husband takes care
to provide a Cradle, which is soon made, consisting of a Piece of flat Wood,
which they hew with their Hatchets to the Likeness of a Board; it is about
two Foot long, and a Foot broad; to this they brace and tie the Child down
very close, having, near the middle, a Stick fasten'd about two Inches
from the Board, which is for the Child's Breech to rest on,
under which they put a Wad of Moss, that receives the Child's Excrements,
by which means they can shift the Moss, and keep all clean and sweet.
Some Nations have very flat Heads, as you have heard in my Journal,
which is made whilst tied on this Cradle, as that Relation informs you.
These Cradles are apt to make the Body flat; yet they are
the most portable things that can be invented; for there is a String
which goes from one Corner of the Board to the other,
whereby the Mother flings her Child on her Back; so the Infant's Back
is towards hers, and its Face looks up towards the Sky.  If it rains,
she throws her Leather or Woollen Match-coat, over her Head,
which covers the Child all over, and secures her and it
from the Injuries of rainy Weather.  The Savage Women quit all Company,
and dress not their own Victuals, during their Purgations.

After they have had several Children, they grow strangely out of Shape
in their Bodies; As for Barrenness, I never knew any of their Women,
that have not Children when marry'd.

{Indian Womens Habit.}
The Womens Dress is, in severe Weather, a hairy Match-coat
in the Nature of a Plad, which keeps out the Cold, and (as I said before)
defends their Children from the Prejudices of the Weather.  At other times,
they have only a sort of Flap or Apron containing two Yards in Length,
and better than half a Yard deep.  Sometimes, it is a Deer-Skin dress'd white,
and pointed or slit at the bottom, like Fringe.  When this is clean,
it becomes them very well.  Others wear blue or red Flaps
made of Bays and Plains, which they buy of the English, of both which
they tuck in the Corners, to fasten the Garment, and sometimes make it fast
with a Belt.  All of them, when ripe, have a small String round the Waste,
to which another is tied and comes between their Legs, where always
is a Wad of Moss against the Os pubis; but never any Hair
is there to be found:  Sometimes, they wear Indian Shooes, or Moggizons,
which are made after the same manner, as the Mens are.

The Hair of their Heads is made into a long Roll like a Horses Tail,
and bound round with Ronoak or Porcelan, which is a sort of Beads
they make of the Conk-Shells.  Others that have not this,
make a Leather-String serve.

{Indian Mens Habit.}
The Indian Men have a Match-Coat of Hair, Furs, Feathers, or Cloth,
as the Women have.  Their Hair is roll'd up, on each Ear, as the Womens,
only much shorter, and oftentimes a Roll on the Crown of the Head, or Temples,
which is just as they fancy; there being no Strictness in their Dress.
Betwixt their Legs comes a Piece of Cloth, that is tuck'd in by a Belt
both before and behind.  This is to hide their Nakedness,
of which Decency they are very strict Observers, although never practised
before the Christians came amongst them.  They wear Shooes,
of Bucks, and sometimes Bears Skin, which they tan in an Hour or two;
with the Bark of Trees boil'd, wherein they put the Leather whilst hot,
and let it remain a little while, whereby it becomes so qualify'd,
as to endure Water and Dirt, without growing hard.  These have no Heels,
and are made as fit for the Feet, as a Glove is for the Hand,
and are very easie to travel in, when one is a little us'd to them.
{Indians washing in the River.}  When these Savages live near the Water,
they frequent the Rivers in Summer-time very much, where both Men and Women
very often in a day go in naked to wash themselves, though not
both Sexes together.

{Match-Coats how made.}
Their Feather Match-Coats are very pretty, especially some of them,
which are made extraordinary charming, containing several pretty Figures
wrought in Feathers, making them seem like a fine Flower Silk-Shag;
and when new and fresh, they become a Bed very well, instead of a Quilt.
Some of another sort are made of Hare, Raccoon, Bever, or Squirrel-Skins,
which are very warm.  Others again are made of the green Part
of the Skin of a Mallard's Head, which they sew perfectly well together,
their Thread being either the Sinews of a Deer divided very small,
or Silk-Grass.  When these are finish'd, they look very finely,
though they must needs be very troublesome to make.  Some of their great Men,
as Rulers and such, that have Plenty of Deer Skins by them,
will often buy the English-made Coats, which they wear
on Festivals and other Days of Visiting.  Yet none ever buy any Breeches,
saying, that they are too much confin'd in them, which prevents their Speed
in running, &c.

We have some Indians, that are more civilized than the rest,
which wear Hats, Shooes, Stockings, and Breeches, with very tolerable
Linnen Shirts, which is not common amongst these Heathens.
The Paspitank Indians did formerly keep Cattle, and make Butter.

{Civiliz'd Indians.  Hatteras Indians.}
These are them that wear the English Dress.  Whether they
have Cattle now or no, I am not certain; but I am of the Opinion,
that such Inclinations in the Savages should meet with Encouragement,
and every Englishman ought to do them Justice, and not defraud them
of their Land, which has been allotted them formerly by the Government;
for if we do not shew them Examples of Justice and Vertue,
we can never bring them to believe us to be a worthier Race of Men
than themselves.

The Dresses of these People are so different, according to
the Nation that they belong to, that it is impossible to recount
all the whimsical Figures that they sometimes make by their Antick Dresses.
Besides, Carolina is a warm Country, and very mild in its Winters,
to what Virginia, Maryland, Pensylvania, New-York, the Jerseys,
and New-England are; wherefore, our Indians Habit very much differs
from the Dresses that appear amongst the Savages who inhabit
those cold Countries; in regard their chiefest Cloathing for the Winter-Season
is made of the Furs of Bever, Raccoon, and other Northern Furs,
that our Climate is not acquainted withal, they producing some Furs,
as the Monack, Moor, Marten, Black Fox, and others to us unknown.

{Painting for War.}
Their Dress in Peace and War, is quite different.  Besides,
when they go to War, their Hair is comb'd out by the Women,
and done over very much with Bears Grease, and red Root;
with Feathers, Wings, Rings, Copper, and Peak, or Wampum in their Ears.
Moreover, they buy Vermillion of the Indian Traders, wherewith they paint
their Faces all over red, and commonly make a Circle of Black about one Eye,
and another Circle of White about the other, whilst others bedawb their Faces
with Tobacco-Pipe Clay, Lamp-black, black Lead, and divers other Colours,
which they make with the several sorts of Minerals and Earths
that they get in different Parts of the Country, where they hunt and travel.
When these Creatures are thus painted, they make the most frightful Figures
that can be imitated by Men, and seem more like Devils than Humane Creatures.
You may be sure, that they are about some Mischief, when you see them
thus painted; for in all the Hostilities which have ever been acted
against the English at any time, in several of the Plantations of America,
the Savages always appear'd in this Disguize, whereby they might never after
be discover'd, or known by any of the Christians that should happen
to see them after they had made their Escape; for it is impossible,
ever to know an Indian under these Colours, although he has been
at your House a thousand times, and you know him, at other times,
as well as you do any Person living.  As for their Women, they never use
any Paint on their Faces; neither do they ever carry them along with them
into the Field, when they intend any Expedition, leaving them at home
with the old Men and Children.

{Ear Bobs.}
Some of the Indians wear great Bobs in their Ears, and sometimes
in the Holes thereof they put Eagles and other Birds, Feathers, for a Trophy.
When they kill any Fowl, they commonly pluck off the downy Feathers,
and stick them all over their Heads.  Some (both Men and Women)
wear great Necklaces of their Money made of Shells.  They often wear
Bracelets made of Brass, and sometimes of Iron Wire.

{Indian Money.}
Their Money is of different sorts, but all made of Shells,
which are found on the Coast of Carolina, which are very large and hard,
so that they are very difficult to cut.  Some English Smiths
have try'd to drill this sort of Shell-Money, and thereby thought
to get an Advantage; but it prov'd so hard, that nothing could be gain'd.
They oftentimes make, of this Shell, a sort of Gorge, which they wear
about their Neck in a string; so it hangs on their Collar,
whereon sometimes is engraven a Cross, or some odd sort of Figure,
which comes next in their Fancy.  There are other sorts valued at a Doe-Skin,
yet the Gorges will sometimes sell for three or four Buck-Skins ready drest.
There be others, that eight of them go readily for a Doe Skin;
but the general and current Species of all the Indians in Carolina,
and, I believe, all over the Continent, as far as the Bay of Mexico,
is that which we call Peak, and Ronoak; but Peak more especially.
This is that which at New-York, they call Wampum, and have used it
as current Money amongst the Inhabitants for a great many Years.
This is what many Writers call Porcelan, and is made at New-York
in great Quantities, and with us in some measure.  Five Cubits of this
purchase a dress'd Doe-Skin, and seven or eight purchase a dress'd Buck-Skin.
An English-man could not afford to make so much of this Wampum
for five or ten times the Value; for it is made out of a vast great Shell,
of which that Country affords Plenty; where it is ground smaller
than the small End of a Tobacco-Pipe, or a large Wheat-Straw.
Four or five of these make an Inch, and every one is to be drill'd through,
and made as smooth as Glass, and so strung, as Beads are,
and a Cubit of the Indian Measure contains as much in Length,
as will reach from the Elbow to the End of the little Finger.
They never stand to question, whether it is a tall Man, or a short one,
that measures it; but if this Wampum Peak be black or purple,
as some Part of that Shell is, then it is twice the Value.  This the Indians
grind on Stones and other things, till they make it current,
but the Drilling is the most difficult to the English-men,
which the Indians manage with a Nail stuck in a Cane or Reed.
Thus they roll it continually on their Thighs, with their Right-hand,
holding the Bit of Shell with their Left, so in time they drill a Hole
quite through it, which is a very tedious Work; but especially in making
their Ronoak, four of which will scarce make one Length of Wampum.
The Indians are a People that never value their time,
so that they can afford to make them, and never need to fear
the English will take the Trade out of their Hands.  This is the Money
with which you may buy Skins, Furs, Slaves, or any thing the Indians have;
it being the Mammon (as our Money is to us) that entices and persuades them
to do any thing, and part with every thing they possess,
except their Children for Slaves.  As for their Wives, they are often sold,
and their Daughters violated for it.  With this they buy off Murders;
and whatsoever a Man can do that is ill, this Wampum will quit him of,
and make him, in their Opinion, good and vertuous, though never
so black before.

{Indians how named.}
All the Indians give a Name to their Children, which is not the same
as the Father or Mother, but what they fancy.  This Name they keep,
(if Boys) till they arrive to the Age of a Warriour, which is
sixteen or seventeen Years; then they take a Name to themselves, sometimes,
Eagle, Panther, Allegator, or some such wild Creature;
esteeming nothing on Earth worthy to give them a Name,
but these Wild-Fowl, and Beasts.  Some again take the Name of a Fish,
which they keep as long as they live.

{Indian King and Counsellors.  Every Town a Ruler,
yet one over all the Nation.}
The King is the Ruler of the Nation, and has others under him, to assist him,
as his War-Captains, and Counsellors, who are pick'd out and chosen
from among the ancientest Men of the Nation he is King of.
These meet him in all general Councils and Debates, concerning War, Peace,
Trade, Hunting, and all the Adventures and Accidents of Humane Affairs,
which appear within their Verge; where all Affairs are discoursed of
and argued pro and con, very deliberately (without making
any manner of Parties or Divisions) for the Good of the Publick;
for, as they meet there to treat, they discharge their Duty
with all the Integrity imaginable, never looking towards their Own Interest,
before the Publick Good.  After every Man has given his Opinion,
that which has most Voices, or, in Summing up, is found the most reasonable,
that they make use of without any Jars and Wrangling, and put it in Execution,
the first Opportunity that offers.

{Succession how.}
The Succession falls not to the King's Son, but to his Sister's Son,
which is a sure way to prevent Impostors in the Succession.
Sometimes they poison the Heir to make way for another,
which is not seldom done, when they do not approve of the Youth
that is to succeed them.  The King himself is commonly chief Doctor
in that Cure.

They are so well versed in Poison, that they are often found to poison
whole Families; nay, most of a Town; and which is most to be admired,
they will poison a running Spring, or Fountain of Water,
so that whosoever drinks thereof, shall infallible die.
When the Offender is discover'd, his very Relations urge for Death,
whom nothing will appease, but the most cruel Torment imaginable,
which is executed in the most publick Manner that it's possible
to act such a Tragedy in.  For all the whole Nation, and all the Indians
within a hundred Mile (if it is possible to send for them) are summon'd
to come and appear at such a Place and Time, to see and rejoyce at
the Torments and Death of such a Person, who is the common and profess'd Enemy
to all the friendly Indians thereabouts, who now lies under
the Condemnation of the whole Nation, and accordingly is to be put to Death.
Then all appear (young and old) from all the adjacent Parts,
and meet, with all the Expressions of Joy, to consummate
this horrid and barbarous Feast, which is carried on after this dismal Manner.
{Poisoning Indians how punished.}  First, they bring the Prisoner
to the Place appointed for the Execution, where he is set down on his Breech
on the Ground.  Then they all get about him, and you shall not see
one sorrowful or dejected Countenance amongst them, but all
very merrily dispos'd, as if some Comedy was to be acted,
instead of a Tragedy.  He that is appointed to be the chief Executioner,
takes a Knife, and bids him hold out his Hands, which he does,
and then cuts round the Wrist through the Skin, which is drawn off
like a Glove, and flead quite off at the Fingers Ends; then they break
his Joints and Bones, and buffet and torment him after a very inhumane Manner,
till some violent Blow perhaps ends his Days; then they burn him to Ashes,
and throw them down the River.  Afterwards they eat, drink and are merry,
repeating all the Actions of the Tormentors and the Prisoner,
with a great deal of Mirth and Satisfaction.  This Accusation is laid
against an Indian Heroe sometimes wrongfully, or when they have a mind
to get rid of a Man that has more Courage and Conduct than his neighbouring
Kings or great Men; then they alledge the Practice of poisoning Indians
against him, and make a Rehearsal of every Indian that died
for a year or two, and say, that they were poison'd by such an Indian;
which Reports stir up all the Relations of the deceased
against the said Person, and by such means make him away presently.
In some Affairs, these Savages are very reserv'd and politick,
and will attend a long time with a great deal of Patience,
to bring about their Designs; they being never impatient or hasty
in executing any of their Designs of Revenge.

Now I am gone so far in giving an Account of the Indians Temper,
I will proceed; and can give you no other Character of them,
but that they are a very wary People, and are never hasty or impatient.
They will endure a great many Misfortunes, Losses, and Disapointments
without shewing themselves, in the least, vex'd or uneasy.
When they go by Water, if there proves a Head-Wind, they never vex and fret,
as the Europeans do, and let what Misfortune come to them,
as will or can happen, they never relent.  Besides, there is one Vice
very common every where, which I never found amongst them,
which is Envying other Mens Happiness, because their Station is not equal to,
or above, their Neighbours.  Of this Sin I cannot say I ever saw an Example,
though they are a People that set as great a Value upon themselves,
as any sort of Men in the World; upon which Account they find something
Valuable in themselves above Riches.  Thus, he that is a good Warriour,
is the proudest Creature living; and he that is an expert Hunter, is esteem'd
by the People and himself; yet all these are natural Vertues and Gifts,
and not Riches, which are as often in the Possession of a Fool as a Wise-man.
Several of the Indians are possess'd of a great many Skins, Wampum,
Ammunition, and what other things are esteem'd Riches amongst them;
yet such an Indian is no more esteem'd amongst them, than any other
ordinary Fellow, provided he has no personal Endowments, which are
the Ornaments that must gain him an Esteem among them; for a great Dealer,
amongst the Indians, is no otherwise respected and esteemed,
than as a Man that strains his Wits, and fatigues himself, to furnish others
with Necessaries of Life, that live much easier and enjoy more of the World,
than he himself does, with all his Pelf.  {Indians not afraid to die.}
If they are taken Captives, and expect a miserable Exit, they sing;
if Death approach them in Sickness, they are not afraid of it;
nor are ever heard to say, Grant me some time.  They know by Instinct,
and daily Example, that they must die; wherefore, they have
that great and noble Gift, to submit to every thing that happens,
and value nothing that attacks them.

Their Cruelty to their Prisoners of War is what they are seemingly
guilty of an Error in, (I mean as to a natural Failing) because they strive
to invent the most inhumane Butcheries for them, that the Devils themselves
could invent, or hammer out of Hell; they esteeming Death no Punishment,
but rather an Advantage to him, that is exported out of this
into another World.

{Indians Cruelty to Prisoners of War.}
Therefore, they inflict on them Torments, wherein they prolong Life
in that miserable state as long as they can, and never miss Skulping of them,
as they call it, which is, to cut off the Skin from the Temples,
and taking the whole Head of Hair along with it, as if it was a Night-cap.
Sometimes, they take the Top of the Skull along with it; all which
they preserve, and carefully keep by them, for a Trophy of their Conquest
over their Enemies.  Others keep their Enemies Teeth, which are taken in War,
whilst others split the Pitch-Pine into Splinters, and stick them
into the Prisoners Body yet alive.  Thus they light them, which burn like
so many Torches; and in this manner, they make him dance round a great Fire,
every one buffeting and deriding him, till he expires, when every one
strives to get a Bone or some Relick of this unfortunate Captive.
One of the young Fellows, that has been at the Wars, and has had the Fortune
to take a Captive, returns the proudest Creature on Earth,
and sets such a Value on himself, that he knows not how to contain himself
in his Senses.  The Iroquois, or Sinnagers, are the most Warlike Indians
that we know of, being always at War, and not to be persuaded
from that Way of Living, by any Argument that can be used.
If you go to persuade them to live peaceably with the Tuskeruros,
and let them be one People, and in case those Indians desire it,
and will submit to them, they will answer you, that they cannot live
without War, which they have ever been used to; and that if Peace be made
with the Indians they now war withal, they must find out some others
to wage War against; for, for them to live in Peace, is to live
out of their Element, War, Conquest, and Murder, being what they delight in,
and value themselves for.  {Indians flea and cut off part of the Feet.}
When they take a Slave, and intend to keep him to Work in their Fields,
they flea the Skin from the Setting on of his Toes to the middle of his Foot,
so cut off one half of his Feet, wrapping the Skin over the Wounds,
and healing them.  By this cruel Method, the Indian Captive is hinder'd
from making his Escape, for he can neither run fast or go any where,
but his Feet are more easily traced and discover'd.  Yet I know one Man
who made his Escape from them, tho' they had thus disabled him,
as you may see in my Journal.

The Indians ground their Wars on Enmity, not on Interest, as the Europeans
generally do; for the Loss of the meanest Person in the Nation,
they will go to War and lay all at Stake, and prosecute their Design
to the utmost; till the Nation they were injur'd by, be wholly destroy'd,
or make them that Satisfaction which they demand.  They are very politick,
in waging, and carrying on their War, first by advising with
all the ancient Men of Conduct and Reason, that belong to their Nation;
such as superannuated War-Captains, and those that have been Counsellors
for many Years, and whose Advice has commonly succeeded very well.
They have likewise their Field Counsellors, who are accustomed to Ambuscades,
and Surprizes, which Methods are commonly used by the Savages;
for I scarce ever heard of a Field-Battle fought amongst them.

One of their Expeditions afforded an Instance, worthy mention,
which was thus; Two Nations of Indians here in Carolina
were at War together, and a Party of each were in the Forest
ranging to see what Enemies they could take.  The lesser Number
found they were discover'd, and could not well get over a River
(that lay betwixt them and their home) without engaging the other Party,
whose Numbers were much the greater; so they call'd a Council,
which met, and having weigh'd their present Circumstances
with a great deal of Argument and Debate, for a considerable time,
and found their Enemies Advantage, and that they could expect no Success
in Engaging such an unequal Number; they, at last, concluded on
this Stratagem, which, in my Opinion, carried a great deal of Policy
along with it.  {Indian Politicks.}  It was, That the same Night,
they should make a great Fire, which they were certain would be discover'd
by the adverse Party, and there dress up Logs of Wood in their Cloaths,
and make them exactly seem like Indians, that were asleep by the Fireside;
(which is their Way, when in the Woods) so, said they, our Enemies will fire
upon these Images, supposing them to be us, who will lie in Ambuscade,
and, after their Guns are unloaded, shall deal well enough with them.
This Result was immediately put in Execution, and the Fire was made
by the side of a Valley, where they lay perdu very advantageously.
Thus, a little before Break of Day, (which commonly is the Hour
they surprize their Enemies in) the Indians came down to their Fire,
and at once fired in upon those Logs in the Indians Cloaths,
and run up to them, expecting they had kill'd every Man dead;
but they found themselves mistaken, for then the other Indians,
who had lain all the Night stark-naked in the Bottom, attack'd them
with their loaded Pieces, which so surprized them, that every Man
was taken Prisoner, and brought in bound to their Town.

Another Instance was betwixt the Machapunga Indians, and the Coranine's,
on the Sand-Banks; which was as follows.  {Machapunga King Charles.}
The Machapungas were invited to a Feast, by the Coranines;
(which two Nations had been a long time at War together,
and had lately concluded a Peace.)  Thereupon, the Machapunga Indians
took the Advantage of coming to the Coranines Feast, which was
to avoid all Suspicion, and their King, who, of a Savage,
is a great Politician and very stout, order'd all his Men
to carry their Tamahauks along with them, hidden under their Match-Coats,
which they did; and being acquainted when to fall on, by the Word given,
they all (upon this Design) set forward for the Feast, and came to
the Coranine Town, where they had gotten Victuals, Fruit,
and such things as make an Indian Entertainment, all ready
to make these new Friends welcome, which they did; and, after Dinner,
towards the Evening, (as it is customary amongst them) they went to Dancing,
all together; so when the Machapunga King saw the best Opportunity offer,
he gave the Word, and his Men pull'd their Tamahauks or Hatchets
from under their Match-Coats, and kill'd several, and took the rest Prisoners,
except some few that were not present, and about four or five that escap'd.
The Prisoners they sold Slaves to the English.  At the time this was done,
those Indians had nothing but Bows and Arrows, neither side having Guns.

The Indians are very revengeful, and never forget an Injury done,
till they have receiv'd Satisfaction.  Yet they are the freest People
from Heats and Passions (which possess the Europeans) of any
I ever heard of.  {Drunkenness in Indians.}  They never call any Man
to account for what he did, when he was drunk; but say, it was the Drink
that caused his Misbehaviour, therefore he ought to be forgiven:
They never frequent a Christian's House that is given to Passion,
nor will they ever buy or sell with him, if they can get
the same Commodities of any other Person; for they say,
such Men are mad Wolves, and no more Men.

{Indians not Jealous.}
They know not what Jealousy is, because they never think
their Wives are unconstant, unless they are Eye-witnesses thereof.
They are generally very bashful, especially the young Maids,
who when they come into a strange Cabin, where they are not acquainted,
never ask for any thing, though never so hungry or thirsty,
but sit down, without speaking a Word (be it never so long)
till some of the House asks them a Question, or falls into Discourse,
with the Stranger.  I never saw a Scold amongst them, and to their Children
they are extraordinary tender and indulgent; neither did I ever see
a Parent correct a Child, excepting one Woman, that was the King's Wife,
and she (indeed) did possess a Temper that is not commonly found amongst them.
{Indians Complements.}  They are free from all manner of Compliments,
except Shaking of Hands, and Scratching on the Shoulder,
which two are the greatest Marks of Sincerity and Friendship,
that can be shew'd one to another.  They cannot express fare you well;
but when they leave the House, will say, I go straightway,
which is to intimate their Departure; and if the Man of the House
has any Message to send by the going Man, he may acquaint him therewith.
Their Tongue allows not to say, Sir, I am your Servant;
because they have no different Titles for Man, only King, War-Captain,
Old Man, or Young Man, which respect the Stations and Circumstances
Men are employ'd in, and arriv'd to, and not Ceremony.  As for Servant,
they have no such thing, except Slave, and their Dogs, Cats,
tame or domestick Beasts, and Birds, are call'd by the same Name:
For the Indian Word for Slave includes them all.  So when an Indian
tells you he has got a Slave for you, it may (in general Terms, as they use)
be a young Eagle, a Dog, Otter, or any other thing of that Nature,
which is obsequiously to depend on the Master for its Sustenance.

{Indians not afraid of Spirits.}
They are never fearful in the Night, nor do the Thoughts of Spirits
ever trouble them; such as the many Hobgoblins and Bugbears that we suck in
with our Milk, and the Foolery of our Nurses and Servants suggest to us;
who by their idle Tales of Fairies, and Witches, make such Impressions
on our tender Years, that at Maturity, we carry Pigmies Souls,
in Giants Bodies, and ever after are thereby so much depriv'd of Reason,
and unman'd, as never to be Masters of half the Bravery
Nature design'd for us.

Not but that the Indians have as many Lying Stories
of Spirits and Conjurers, as any People in the World; but they tell it
with no Disadvantage to themselves; for the great Esteem
which the Old Men bring themselves to, is by making the others believe
their Familiarity with Devils and Spirits, and how great a Correspondence
they have therewith, which if it once gains Credit, they ever after are held
in the greatest Veneration imaginable, and whatever they after impose
upon the People, is receiv'd as infallible.  They are so little startled
at the Thoughts of another World, that they not seldom murder themselves;
as for Instance, a Bear-River Indian, a very likely young Fellow,
about twenty Years of Age, whose Mother was angry at his drinking
of too much Rum, and chid him for it, thereupon reply'd,
he would have her satisfied, and he would do the like no more;
upon which he made his Words good; for he went aside, and shot himself dead.
This was a Son of the politick King of the Machapunga, I spoke of before,
and has the most Cunning of any Indian I ever met withal.

Most of the Savages are much addicted to Drunkenness, a Vice
they never were acquainted with, till the Christians came amongst them.
Some of them refrain drinking strong Liquors, but very few of that sort
are found amongst them.  Their chief Liquor is Rum, without any Mixture.
This the English bring amongst them, and buy Skins, Furs,
Slaves and other of their Commodities therewith.  They never are contented
with a little, but when once begun, they must make themselves quite drunk;
otherwise they will never rest, but sell all they have in the World,
rather than not have their full Dose.  In these drunken Frolicks,
(which are always carried on in the Night) they sometimes murder one another,
fall into the Fire, fall down Precipices, and break their Necks,
with several other Misfortunes which this drinking of Rum brings upon them;
and tho' they are sensible of it, yet they have no Power
to refrain this Enemy.  About five years ago, when Landgrave Daniel
was Governour, he summon'd in all the Indian Kings and Rulers to meet,
and in a full Meeting of the Government and Council, with those Indians,
they agreed upon a firm Peace, and the Indian Rulers desired
no Rum might be sold to them, which was granted, and a Law made,
that inflicted a Penalty on those that sold Rum to the Heathens;
but it was never strictly observ'd, and besides, the young Indians
were so disgusted at that Article, that they threatned to kill the Indians
that made it, unless it was laid aside, and they might have Rum sold them,
when they went to the Englishmens Houses to buy it.

Some of the Heathens are so very poor, that they have no Manner of Cloaths,
save a Wad of Moss to hide their Nakedness.  These are either lusty
and will not work; otherwise, they are given to Gaming or Drunkenness;
yet these get Victuals as well as the rest, because that is common
amongst them.  If they are caught in theft they are Slaves till they repay
the Person, (as I mention'd before) but to steal from the English
they reckon no Harm.  Not but that I have known some few Savages
that have been as free from Theft as any of the Christians.
When they have a Design to lie with a Woman, which they cannot obtain
any otherwise than by a larger Reward than they are able to give,
they then strive to make her drunk, which a great many of them will be;
then they take the Advantage, to do with them what they please,
and sometimes in their Drunkenness, cut off their Hair and sell it
to the English, which is the greatest Affront can be offer'd them.
They never value Time; for if they be going out to hunt, fish,
or any other indifferent Business, you may keep them in talk
as long as you please, so you but keep them in Discourse, and seem pleased
with their Company; yet none are more expeditious and safer Messengers
than they, when any extraordinary Business that they are sent about
requires it.

{Not pass over a Tree.}
When they are upon travelling the Woods, they keep a constant Pace,
neither will they stride over a Tree that lies cross the Path, but always
go round it, which is quite contrary to the Custom of the English,
and other Europeans.  {Cut with a Knife how.  A Knife of Reed.}
When they cut with a Knife, the Edge is towards them, whereas we
always cut and whittle from us.  {Not left-handed.}  Nor did I ever see
one of them left-handed.  {Get Fire how.}  Before the Christians
came amongst them, not knowing the Use of Steel and Flints,
they got their Fire with Sticks, which by vehement Collision,
or Rubbing together, take Fire.  This Method they will sometimes practise now,
when it has happen'd thro' rainy Weather, or some other Accident,
that they have wet their Spunk, which is a sort of soft corky Substance,
generally of a Cinnamon Colour, and grows in the concave part of an Oak,
Hiccory, and several other Woods, being dug out with an Ax,
and always kept by the Indians, instead of Tinder or Touch-wood,
both which it exceeds.  You are to understand, that the two Sticks
they use to strike Fire withal, are never of one sort of Wood,
but always differ from each other.

They are expert Travellers, and though they have not the Use
of our artificial Compass, yet they understand the North-point exactly,
let them be in never so great a Wilderness.  One Guide is a short Moss,
that grows upon some Trees, exactly on the North-Side thereof.

{Indian Compass.}
Besides, they have Names for eight of the thirty two Points,
and call the Winds by their several Names, as we do; but indeed more properly,
for the North-West Wind is called the cold Wind; the North-East the wet Wind;
the South the warm Wind; and so agreeably of the rest.  Sometimes it happens,
that they have a large River or Lake to pass over, and the Weather
is very foggy, as it often happens in the Spring and Fall of the Leaf;
so that they cannot see which Course to steer:  In such a Case,
they being on one side of the River, or Lake, they know well enough
what Course such a Place (which they intend for) bears from them.
Therefore, they get a great many Sticks and Chunks of Wood in their Canoe,
and then set off directly for their Port, and now and then throw over
a Piece of Wood, which directs them, by seeing how the Stick bears
from the Canoes Stern, which they always observe to keep right aft;
and this is the Indian Compass by which they will go over
a broad Water of ten or twenty Leagues wide.  They will find
the Head of any River, though it is five, six or seven hundred miles off,
and they never were there, in their Lives before; as is often prov'd,
by their appointing to meet on the Head of such a River, where perhaps,
none of them ever was before, but where they shall rendezvous exactly
at the prefixt time; and if they meet with any Obstruction,
they leave certain Marks in the Way, where they that come after
will understand how many have pass'd by already, and which way they are gone.
Besides, in their War Expeditions, they have very certain Hieroglyphicks,
whereby each Party informs the other of the Success or Losses
they have met withal; all which is so exactly perform'd
by their Sylvian Marks and Characters, that they are never at a Loss
to understand one another.  Yet there was never found any Letters
amongst the Savages of Carolina; nor, I believe, among any other Natives
in America, that were possess'd with any manner of Writing or Learning
throughout all the Discoveries of the New-World.  {Indians make Maps.}
They will draw Maps, very exactly, of all the Rivers, Towns, Mountains,
and Roads, or what you shall enquire of them, which you may draw
by their Directions, and come to a small matter of Latitude,
reckoning by their Days Journeys.  These Maps they will draw
in the Ashes of the Fire, and sometimes upon a Mat or Piece of Bark.
I have put a Pen and Ink into a Savage's Hand, and he has drawn me
the Rivers, Bays, and other Parts of a Country, which afterwards
I have found to agree with a great deal of Nicety:  But you must be very much
in their Favour, otherwise they will never make these Discoveries to you;
especially, if it be in their own Quarters.  {No Discovery of Mines.}
And as for Mines of Silver and other Metals, we are satisfied we have enow,
and those very rich, in Carolina and its adjacent Parts; some of which
the Indians are acquainted withal, although no Enquirers thereafter,
but what came, and were discover'd, by Chance; yet they say, it is this Metal
that the English covet, as they do their Peak and Ronoak;
and that we have gain'd Ground of them wherever we have come.
Now, say they, if we should discover these Minerals to the English,
they would settle at or near these Mountains, and bereave us
of the best Hunting-Quarters we have, as they have already done
wherever they have inhabited; so by that means, we shall be driven
to some unknown Country, to live, hunt, and get our Bread in.
These are the Reasons that the Savages give, for not making known
what they are acquainted withal, of that Nature.  And indeed,
all Men that have ever gone upon those Discoveries, allow them to be good;
{Mr. Mitchell.} more especially, my ingenious Friend
Mr. Francis-Louis Mitchell, of Bern in Switzerland, who has been,
for several Years, very indefatigable and strict in his Discoveries
amongst those vast Ledges of Mountains, and spacious Tracts of Land,
lying towards the Heads of the great Bays and Rivers of Virginia, Maryland,
and Pensylvania, where he has discover'd a spacious Country
inhabited by none but the Savages, and not many of them;
who yet are of a very friendly Nature to the Christians.  This Gentleman
has been employ'd by the Canton of Bern, to find out a Tract of Land
in the English America, where that Republick might settle
some of their People; which Proposal, I believe, is now in a fair way
towards a Conclusion, between her Majesty of Great-Britain and that Canton.
{Switzers Settlement in America.}  Which must needs be of great Advantage
to both; and as for ourselves, I believe, no Man that is in his Wits,
and understands the Situation and Affairs of America,
but will allow, nothing can be of more Security and Advantage
to the Crown and Subjects of Great-Britain, than to have our Frontiers
secured by a warlike People, and our Friends, as the Switzers are;
especially when we have more Indians than we can civilize,
and so many Christian Enemies lying on the back of us, that we do not know
how long or short a time it may be, before they visit us.  Add to these,
the Effects and Product that may be expected from those Mountains;
which may hereafter prove of great Advantage to the British Monarchy,
and none more fit than an industrious People, bred in a mountainous Country,
and inur'd to all the Fatigues of War and Travel, to improve a Country.
Thus we have no room to doubt, but as soon as any of those Parts
are seated by the Switzers, a great many Britains will strive
to live amongst them, for the Benefit of the sweet Air and healthful Climate,
which that Country affords, were it only for the Cultivating of Hemp,
Flax, Wine, and other valuable Staples, which those People
are fully acquainted withal:  Not to mention the Advantages
already discover'd by that worthy Gentleman I just now spoke of,
who is highly deserving of the Conduct and Management of such an Affair,
as that wise Canton has entrusted him withal.

{Hunting of the Savages.}
When these Savages go a hunting, they commonly go out in great Numbers,
and oftentimes a great many Days Journey from home, beginning at
the coming in of the Winter; that is, when the Leaves are fallen
from the Trees, and are become dry.  'Tis then they burn the Woods,
by setting Fire to the Leaves, and wither'd Bent and Grass,
{Moss Match.} which they do with a Match made of the black Moss
that hangs on the Trees in Carolina, and is sometimes above six Foot long.
This, when dead, becomes black, (tho' of an Ash-Colour before)
and will then hold Fire as well as the best Match we have in Europe.
In Places, where this Moss is not found, (as towards the Mountains)
they make Lintels of the Bark of Cypress beaten, which serve as well.
Thus they go and fire the Woods for many Miles, and drive
the Deer and other Game into small Necks of Land and Isthmus's,
where they kill and destroy what they please.  In these Hunting-Quarters,
they have their Wives and Ladies of the Camp, where they eat
all the Fruits and Dainties of that Country, and live in all
the Mirth and Jollity, which it is possible for such People
to entertain themselves withal.  Here it is, that they get
their Complement of Deer-Skins and Furs to trade with the English,
(the Deer-Skins being in Season in Winter, which is contrary to England.)
All small Game, as Turkeys, Ducks, and small Vermine, they commonly kill
with Bow and Arrow, thinking it not worth throwing Powder and Shot after them.
Of Turkeys they have abundance; especially, in Oak-Land,
as most of it is, that lies any distance backwards.  I have been often
in their Hunting-Quarters, where a roasted or barbakued Turkey,
eaten with Bears Fat, is held a good Dish; and indeed, I approve of it
very well; for the Bears Grease is the sweetest and least offensive
to the Stomach (as I said before) of any Fat of Animals I ever tasted.
{Beating of Corn.}  The Savage Men never beat their Corn to make Bread;
but that is the Womens Work, especially the Girls, of whom you shall see
four beating with long great Pestils in a narrow wooden Mortar;
and every one keeps her Stroke so exactly, that 'tis worthy of Admiration.
Their Cookery continues from Morning till Night.  The Hunting
makes them hungry; and the Indians are a People that always
eat very often, not seldom getting up at Midnight, to eat.
They plant a great many sorts of Pulse, Part of which they eat green
in the Summer, keeping great Quantities for their Winter-Store,
which they carry along with them into the Hunting-Quarters, and eat them.

The small red Pease is very common with them, and they eat
a great deal of that and other sorts boil'd with their Meat,
or eaten with Bears Fat, which Food makes them break Wind backwards,
which the Men frequently do, and laugh heartily at it, it being accounted
no ill Manners amongst the Indians:  Yet the Women are more modest,
than to follow that ill Custom.  At their setting out, they have Indians
to attend their Hunting-Camp, that are not good and expert Hunters;
{Servile Indians.} therefore are employ'd to carry Burdens,
to get Bark for the Cabins, and other Servile Work; also to go
backward and forward, to their Towns, to carry News to the old People,
whom they leave behind them.  The Women are forced to carry
their Loads of Grain and other Provisions, and get Fire-Wood;
for a good Hunter, or Warriour in these Expeditions, is employ'd
in no other Business, than the Affairs of Game and Battle.
{Dry'd Fruits.}  The wild Fruits which are dry'd in the Summer, over Fires,
on Hurdles and in the Sun, are now brought into the Field; as are likewise
the Cakes and Quiddonies of Peaches, and that Fruit and Bilberries dry'd,
of which they stew and make Fruit-Bread and Cakes.  {Pigeons Fat.}
In some parts, where Pigeons are plentiful, they get of their Fat
enough to supply their Winter Stores.  Thus they abide in these Quarters,
all the Winter long, till the Time approach for planting
their Maiz and other Fruits.  {Bowls and Tobacco-Pipes to make.  Dress Skins.}
In these quarters, at Spare-hours, the Women make Baskets and Mats
to lie upon, and those that are not extraordinary Hunters,
make Bowls, Dishes, and Spoons, of Gum-wood, and the Tulip-Tree;
others (where they find a Vein of white Clay, fit for their purpose)
make Tobacco-pipes, all which are often transported to other Indians,
that perhaps have greater Plenty of Deer and other Game;
so they buy (with these Manufactures) their raw Skins, with the Hair on,
which our neighbouring Indians bring to their Towns,
and, in the Summer-time, make the Slaves and sorry Hunters dress them,
the Winter-Sun being not strong enough to dry them; and those
that are dry'd in the Cabins are black and nasty with the Lightwood Smoke,
which they commonly burn.  Their Way of dressing their Skins
is by soaking them in Water, so they get the Hair off, with an Instrument
made of the Bone of a Deer's Foot; yet some use a sort of Iron Drawing-Knife,
which they purchase of the English, and after the Hair is off,
they dissolve Deers Brains, (which beforehand are made in a Cake
and baked in the Embers) in a Bowl of Water, so soak the Skins therein,
till the Brains have suck'd up the Water; then they dry it gently,
and keep working it with an Oyster-Shell, or some such thing,
to scrape withal, till it is dry; whereby it becomes soft and pliable.
Yet these so dress'd will not endure wet, but become hard thereby;
which to prevent, they either cure them in the Smoke,
or tan them with Bark, as before observ'd; not but that young Indian Corn,
beaten to a Pulp, will effect the same as the Brains.  They are not only
good Hunters of the wild Beasts and Game of the Forest, but very expert
in taking the Fish of the Rivers and Waters near which they inhabit,
and are acquainted withal.  {Fish to strike.}  Thus they that live
a great way up the Rivers practise Striking Sturgeon and Rock-fish, or Bass,
when they come up the Rivers to spawn; besides the vast Shoals of Sturgeon
which they kill and take with Snares, as we do Pike in Europe.  The Herrings
in March and April run a great way up the Rivers and fresh Streams
to spawn, where the Savages make great Wares, with Hedges
that hinder their Passage only in the Middle, where an artificial Pound
is made to take them in; so that they cannot return.  This Method is in use
all over the fresh Streams, to catch Trout and the other Species of Fish
which those Parts afford.  {Craw-fish to take.}  Their taking of Craw-fish
is so pleasant, that I cannot pass it by without mention;
When they have a mind to get these Shell-fish, they take a Piece of Venison,
and half-barbakue or roast it; then they cut it into thin Slices,
which Slices they stick through with Reeds about six Inches asunder,
betwixt Piece and Piece; then the Reeds are made sharp at one end;
and so they stick a great many of them down in the bottom of the Water
(thus baited) in the small Brooks and Runs, which the Craw-fish frequent.
Thus the Indians sit by, and tend those baited Sticks,
every now and then taking them up, to see how many are at the Bait;
where they generally find abundance; so take them off,
and put them in a Basket for the purpose, and stick the Reeds down again.
By this Method, they will, in a little time, catch several Bushels,
which are as good, as any I ever eat.  {Hatteras Indians.}
Those Indians that frequent the Salt-Waters, take abundance of Fish,
some very large, and of several sorts, which to preserve,
they first barbakue, then pull the Fish to Pieces, so dry it in the Sun,
whereby it keeps for Transportation; as for Scate, Oysters, Cockles,
and several sorts of Shell-fish, they open and dry them upon Hurdles,
having a constant Fire under them.  The Hurdles are made of Reeds or Canes
in the shape of a Gridiron.  Thus they dry several Bushels of these Fish,
and keep them for their Necessities.  At the time when they are on the Salts,
and Sea Coasts, they have another Fishery, that is for a little Shell-fish,
{Blackmoor Teeth.} which those in England call Blackmoors Teeth.
These they catch by tying Bits of Oysters to a long String,
which they lay in such places, as, they know, those Shell-Fish haunt.
These Fish get hold of the Oysters, and suck them in, so that they pull up
those long Strings, and take great Quantities of them, which they carry
a great way into the main Land, to trade with the remote Indians,
where they are of great Value; but never near the Sea, by reason
they are common, therefore not esteem'd.  Besides, the Youth and Indian Boys
go in the Night, and one holding a Lightwood Torch, the other has
a Bow and Arrows, and the Fire directing him to see the Fish, he shoots them
with the Arrows; and thus they kill a great many of the smaller Fry,
and sometimes pretty large ones.  {Indians not eat of the first he kills.}
It is an establish'd Custom amongst all these Natives,
that the young Hunter never eats of that Buck, Bear, Fish, or any other Game,
which happens to be the first they kill of that sort; because they believe,
if he should eat thereof, he would never after be fortunate in Hunting.
{Big bellied Woman never eat of the first Fish caught in a Ware.}
The like foolish Ceremony they hold, when they have made a Ware
to take Fish withal; if a big-belly'd Woman eat of the first Dish
that is caught in it, they say, that Ware will never take much Fish;
{Indians not kill Snakes why.} and as for killing of Snakes,
they avoid it, if they lie in their way, because their Opinion is,
that some of the Serpents Kindred would kill some of the Savages Relations,
that should destroy him:  They have thousands of these foolish
Ceremonies and Beliefs, which they are strict Observers of.
Moreover, several Customs are found in some Families, which others keep not;
{Circumcision.} as for Example, two Families of the Machapunga Indians,
use the Jewish Custom of Circumcision, and the rest do not;
neither did I ever know any others amongst the Indians,
that practis'd any such thing; and perhaps, if you ask them,
what is the Reason they do so, they will make you no Manner of Answer;
which is as much as to say, I will not tell you.  Many other Customs
they have, for which they will render no Reason or Account;
and to pretend to give a true Description of their Religion, it is impossible;
for there are a great many of their Absurdities, which, for some Reason,
they reserve as a Secret amongst themselves; or otherwise,
they are jealous of their Weakness in the practising them;
so that they never acquaint any Christian with the Knowledge thereof,
let Writers pretend what they will; {Indian Idols give an account of.}
for I have known them amongst their Idols and dead Kings
in their Quiogozon for several Days, where I could never get Admittance,
to see what they were doing, though I was at great Friendship
with the King and great Men; but all my Persuasions avail'd me nothing.
Neither were any but the King, with the Conjurer, and some few old Men,
in that House; as for the young Men, and chiefest Numbers of the Indians,
they were kept as ignorant of what the Elders were doing, as myself.

{The World is round.}
They all believe, that this World is round, and that there are two Spirits;
the one good, the other bad:  {What they believe of God.
Their offering Idols.}  The good one they reckon to be
the Author and Maker of every thing, and say, that it is he,
that gives them the Fruits of the Earth, and has taught them to hunt, fish,
and be wise enough to overpower the Beasts of the Wilderness,
and all other Creatures, that they may be assistant, and beneficial to Man;
to which they add, that the Quera, or good Spirit, has been very kind
to the English Men, to teach them to make Guns, and Ammunition,
besides a great many other Necessaries, that are helpful to Man,
all which, they say, will be deliver'd to them, when that good Spirit
sees fit.  They do not believe, that God punishes any Man
either in this Life, or that to come; but that he delights in doing good,
and in giving the Fruits of the Earth, and instructing us in making
several useful and ornamental things.  {Devil what.}  They say,
it is a bad Spirit (who lives separate from the good one)
that torments us with Sicknesses, Disappointments, Losses, Hunger, Travel,
and all the Misfortunes, that Humane Life is incident to.
How they are treated in the next World, I have already mention'd,
and, as I said before, they are very resolute in dying,
when in the Hands of Savage Enemies; yet I saw one of their young Men,
a very likely Person, condemn'd, on a Sunday, for Killing a Negro,
and burning the House.  {Indian condemn'd.}  I took good Notice
of his Behaviour, when he was brought out of the House to die,
which was the next Morning after Sentence, but he chang'd his Countenance
with Trembling, and was in the greatest Fear and Agony.  I never saw
any Person under his Circumstances, which, perhaps, might be occasion'd
by his being deliver'd up by his own Nation (which was the Tuskeruro's)
and executed by us, that are not their common Enemies, though he met
with more Favour than he would have receiv'd at the Hands of Savages;
for he was only hang'd on a Tree, near the Place where the Murder
was committed; and the three Kings, that but the day before
shew'd such a Reluctancy to deliver him up, (but would have given another
in his Room) when he was hang'd, pull'd him by the Hand, and said,
`Thou wilt never play any more Rogues Tricks in this World;
whither art thou gone to shew thy Tricks now?'  Which shews these Savages
to be what they really are, (viz) a People that will save their own Men
if they can, but if the Safety of all the People lies at Stake, they will
deliver up the most innocent Person living, and be so far from Concern,
when they have made themselves easy thereby, that they will laugh
at their Misfortunes, and never pity or think of them more.

{Indian Conjurers.}
Their Priests are the Conjurers and Doctors of the Nation.
I shall mention some of their Methods, and Practices; and so leave them
to the Judgment of the Reader.  As I told you before, the Priests make
their Orations at every Feast, or other great Meeting of the Indians.
{Indian Lightning, at Chattooka, at a Feast for rebuilding
a King's House burnt.}  I happen'd to be at one of these great Meetings,
which was at the Funeral of a Tuskeruro Indian, that was slain
with Lightning at a Feast, the day before, where I was amongst the rest;
it was in July, and a very fair day, where, in the Afternoon,
about six or seven a Clock, as they were dealing out their Victuals,
there appear'd a little black Cloud to the North West,
which spread and brought with it Rain, Wind and Lightning;
so we went out from the Place where we were all at Victuals,
and went down to the Cabins where I left the Indians, and went to lie
in my Canoe, which was convenient enough to keep me dry.
The Lightning came so terrible, and down in long Streams,
that I was afraid it would have taken hold of a Barrel of Powder
I had in my Vessel, and so blown me up; but it pleas'd God,
that it did me no Harm; yet the Violence of the Wind had blown
all the Water away, where I rid at Anchor, so that my Canoe lay dry,
and some Indian Women came with Torches in their Hands
to the side of the Canoe, and told me, an Indian was kill'd with Lightning.
The next day, (I think) he was buried, and I stay'd to see the Ceremony,
and was very tractable to help the Indians to trim their Reeds,
and make the Coffin, which pleased them very much, because I had a mind
to see the Interment.  Before he was Interr'd according to their Custom,
they dealt every one some hot Victuals, which he took and did
what he would with:  Then the Doctor began to talk, and told the People
what Lightning was, and that it kill'd every thing that dwelt upon the Earth;
nay, the very Fishes did not escape; for it often reach'd
the Porpoises and other Fish, and destroy'd them; that every thing
strove to shun it, except the Mice, who, he said, were the busiest
in eating their Corn in the Fields, when it lightned the most.
He added, that no Wood or Tree could withstand it, except the black Gum,
and that it would run round that Tree a great many times, to enter therein,
but could not effect it.  Now you must understand, that sort of Gum will not
split or rive; therefore, I suppose, the Story might arise from thence.
At last, he began to tell the most ridiculous absurd Parcel of Lyes
about Lightning, that could be; as that an Indian of that Nation
had once got Lightning in the Likeness of a Partridge;
That no other Lightning could harm him, whilst he had that about him;
and that after he had kept it for several Years, it got away from him;
so that he then became as liable to be struck with Lightning,
as any other Person.  There was present at the same time,
an Indian that had liv'd from his Youth, chiefly in an English House;
so I call'd to him, and told him, what a Parcel of Lyes the Conjurer told,
not doubting but he thought so, as well as I, but I found to the contrary;
for he reply'd, that I was much mistaken, for that old Man
(who, I believe was upwards of an hundred Years old) did never tell Lyes;
and as for what he said, it was very true; for he knew it himself to be so.
{How hard it is to bring the Indians from their Superstition.}
Thereupon, seeing the Fellow's Ignorance, I talk'd no more about it.
{Rattle-Snake kill Indians in Canoes.  Eagles kill it.}
Then the Doctor proceeded to tell a long Tale of a great Rattle-Snake,
which, a great while ago, liv'd by a Creek in that River
(which was Neus) and that it kill'd abundance of Indians;
but at last, a bald Eagle kill'd it, and they were rid of a Serpent,
that us'd to devour whole Canoes full of Indians, at a time.
I have been something tedious upon this Subject, on purpose to shew
what strange ridiculous Stories these Wretches are inclinable to believe.
I suppose, these Doctors understand a little better themselves,
than to give Credit to any such Fooleries; for I reckon them
the cunningest Knaves in all the Pack.  I will therefore begin with
their Physick and Surgery, which is next:  {Indian Physick and Surgery.}
You must know, that the Doctors or Conjurers, to gain a greater Credit
amongst these People, tell them, that all Distempers are
the Effects of evil Spirits, or the bad Spirit, which has struck them
with this or that Malady; therefore, none of these Physicians
undertakes any Distemper, but that he comes to an Exorcism,
to effect the Cure, and acquaints the sick Party's Friends,
that he must converse with the good Spirit, to know whether the Patient
will recover or not; if so, then he will drive out the bad Spirit,
and the Patient will become well.  Now, the general way of their Behaviour
in curing the Sick, (a great deal of which I have seen,
and shall give some Account thereof, in as brief a manner as possible) is,
when an Indian is sick, if they think there is much Danger of Life,
and that he is a great Man or hath good Friends, the Doctor is sent for.
As soon as the Doctor comes into the Cabin, the sick Person is sat
on a Mat or Skin, stark-naked, lying on his Back, and all uncover'd,
except some small Trifle that covers their Nakedness when ripe,
otherwise in very young Children, there is nothing about them.
{Conjuring over the Sick.}  In this manner, the Patient lies,
when the Conjurer appears; and the King of that Nation comes to attend him
with a Rattle made of a Gourd with Pease in it.  This the King delivers
into the Doctor's Hand, whilst another brings a Bowl of Water,
and sets it down:  Then the Doctor begins, and utters some few Words
very softly; afterwards he smells of the Patient's Navel and Belly,
and sometimes scarifies him a little with a Flint, or an Instrument
made of Rattle-Snakes Teeth for that purpose; then he sucks the Patient,
and gets out a Mouthful of Blood and Serum, but Serum chiefly;
which, perhaps, may be a better Method in many Cases, than to take away
great Quantities of Blood, as is commonly practis'd; which he spits
in the Bowl of Water.  Then he begins to mutter, and talk apace,
and, at last, to cut Capers, and clap his Hands on his Breech and Sides,
till he gets into a Sweat, so that a Stranger would think he was running mad;
now and then sucking the Patient, and so, at times, keeps sucking,
till he has got a great Quantity of very ill-coloured Matter out of the Belly,
Arms, Breast, Forehead, Temples, Neck, and most Parts, still continuing
his Grimaces, and antick Postures, which are not to be match'd in Bedlam:
At last, you will see the Doctor all over of a dropping Sweat,
and scarce able to utter one Word, having quite spent himself;
then he will cease for a while, and so begin again, till he comes
in the same Pitch of Raving and seeming Madness, as before,
(all this time the sick Body never so much as moves, although, doubtless,
the Lancing and Sucking must be a great Punishment to them;
but they, certainly, are the patientest and most steady People
under any Burden, that I ever saw in my Life.)  {Whether live or die.}
At last, the Conjurer makes an end, and tells the Patient's Friends,
whether the Person will live or die; {Bury the Serum.}
and then one that waits at this Ceremony, takes the Blood away,
(which remains in a Lump, in the middle of the Water) and buries it
in the Ground, in a Place unknown to any one, but he that inters it.
Now, I believe a great deal of Imposture in these Fellows;
yet I never knew their Judgment fail, though I have seen them
give their Opinion after this Manner, several times:  Some affirm,
that there is a smell of Brimstone in the Cabins, when they are Conjuring,
which I cannot contradict.  Which way it may come, I will not argue,
but proceed to a Relation or two, which I have from a great many Persons,
and some of them worthy of Credit.

{Indian Robbery.}
The first is, of a certain Indian, that one rainy Night, undermin'd a House
made of Logs, (such as the Swedes in America very often make,
and are very strong) which belong'd to Seth Southwell, Esq;
Governor of North-Carolina, and one of the Proprietors.
There was but one place the Indian could get in at, which was very narrow;
the rest was secur'd, by having Barrels of Pork and other Provisions
set against the side of the House, so that if this Indian
had not exactly hit the very Place he undermin'd, it had been impossible
for him to have got therein, because of the full Barrels that stood
round the House, and barricadoed it within.  The Indian stole
sixty or eighty dress'd Deer-Skins, besides Blankets, Powder, Shot and Rum,
(this being the Indian Store-House, where the Trading Goods were kept.)
Now, the Indian had made his Escape, but dropt some of the Skins by the way,
and they track'd his Foot-steps, and found him to be an Indian;
then they guess'd who it was, because none but that Indian
had lately been near the House.  Thereupon, the Governor sent
to the Indian Town that he belong'd to, which was the Tuskeruro's,
and acquainted them that if they did not deliver up the Indian,
who had committed the Robbery, he would take a Course with them,
that would not be very agreeable.  Upon this, the Indians of the Town
he belong'd to, brought him in bound, and deliver'd him up to the Governor,
who laid him in Irons.  At the same time, it happen'd,
that a Robbery was committed amongst themselves, at the Indian Town,
and this Prisoner was one of their Conjurers; so the Indians came down
to the Governor's House, and acquainted him with what had happen'd
amongst them, and that a great Quantity of Peak, was stoln away
out of one of their Cabins, and no one could find out the Thief,
unless he would let the Prisoner conjure for it, who was the only Man they had
at making such Discoveries.  The Governor was content he should try
his Skill for them, but not to have the Prisoners Irons taken off,
which was very well approved of.  The Indian was brought out in his Fetters,
where were the Governor's Family, and several others of the Neighbourhood,
now living, to see this Experiment; which he perform'd thus:

{Conjuring for stoln Goods.}
The Conjurer order'd three Fires to be made in a triangular Form,
which was accordingly done; then he was hoodwink'd very securely,
with a dress'd Deer-Skin, two or three doubles, over his Face.
After he had made some Motions, as they always do, he went directly
out of one of the three Gaps, as exactly as if he had not been blindfolded,
and kept muttering to himself, having a Stick in his Hand,
with which, after some time, he struck two Strokes very hard upon the Ground,
and made thereon a Cross, after which he told the Indian's Name
that had stoln the Goods, and said, that he would have a Cross on his Back;
which prov'd true; for when they took and search'd him, there appear'd
two great Wheals on his Back, one cross the other; for the Thief
was at Governor Southwell's House, and was under no Apprehension
of being discover'd.  The Indians proffer'd to sell him as a Slave
to the Governor, but he refused to buy him; so they took him bound away.

Another Instance, of the like Nature, happen'd at the same House.
One of the Tuskeruro Kings had brought in a Slave to the same Governor,
to whom he had sold him; and before he return'd, fell sick
at the Governor's House; upon which, the Doctor that belong'd
to this King's Nation, was sent for, being a Man that was held to be
the greatest Conjurer amongst them.  It was three Days,
before he could arrive, and he appear'd (when he came) to be
a very little Man, and so old, that his Hair was as white as ever was seen.
When he approach'd the sick King, he order'd a Bowl of Water
to be brought him, and three Chunks of Wood, which was immediately done.
Then he took the Water, and set it by him, and spurted a little on him,
and with the three Pieces of Wood, he made a Place to stand on,
whereby he was rais'd higher; (he being a very low statur'd Man) then he took
a String of Ronoak, which is the same as a String of small Beads;
this he held by one End, between his Fingers; the other End touch'd
the King's Stomach, as he stood on the Logs.  Then he began to talk,
and at length, the By-standers thought really, that they heard somebody
talk to him, but saw no more than what first came in.  At last,
this String of Beads, which hung thus perpendicular, turn'd up
as an Eel would do, and without any Motion of his, they came all up
(in a lump) under his Hand, and hung so for a considerable time,
he never closing his Hand, and at length return'd to their pristine
Length and Shape, at which the Spectators were much frightned.
Then he told the Company, that he would recover, and that his Distemper
would remove into his Leg, all which happen'd to be exactly
as the Indian Doctor had told.  These are Matters of Fact, and I can,
at this day, prove the Truth thereof by several substantial Evidences,
that are Men of Reputation, there being more than a dozen People present,
when this was perform'd; most of whom are now alive.

{Salmon-Creek.}
There are a great many other Stories, of this Nature,
which are seemingly true, being told by Persons that affirm
they were Eye-Witnesses thereof; as, that they have seen one Roncommock
(a Chuwou Indian, and a great Conjurer) take a Reed about two Foot long
in his Mouth, and stand by a Creek-side, where he call'd twice or thrice
with the Reed in his Mouth; and, at last, has open'd his Arms,
and fled over the Creek, which might be near a quarter of a Mile wide or more;
but I shall urge no Man's Belief, but tell my own; which is, that I believe
the two first Accounts, which were acted at Mr. Southwell's Plantation,
as firmly as any Man can believe any thing of that which is told him
by honest Men, and he has not seen; not at all doubting
the Credit of my Authors.

The Cures I have seen perform'd by the Indians, are too many
to repeat here; so I shall only mention some few, and their Method.
{Scald Head cured.}  They cure Scald-heads infallibly, and never miss.
Their chief Remedy as I have seen them make use of, is, the Oil of Acorns,
but from which sort of Oak I am not certain.  They cure Burns beyond Credit.
I have seen a Man burnt in such a manner, (when drunk) by falling into a Fire,
that I did not think he could recover; yet they cur'd him in ten Days,
so that he went about.  I knew another blown up with Powder,
that was cured to Admiration.  {No ulcerated Wounds.}  I never saw an Indian
have an Ulcer, or foul Wound in my Life; neither is there any such thing
to be found amongst them.  {Pox to cure.}  They cure the Pox, by a Berry
that salivates, as Mercury does; yet they use Sweating and Decoctions
very much with it; as they do, almost on every Occasion;
and when they are thoroughly heated, they leap into the River.
The Pox is frequent in some of these Nations; amongst which
I knew one Woman die of it; and they could not, or would not, cure her.
Before she died, she was worn away to a Skeleton, yet walk'd up and down
to the last.  We had a Planter in Carolina, who had got an Ulcer in his Leg,
which had troubled him a great many Years; at last, he apply'd himself
to one of these Indian Conjurers, who was a Pampticough Indian,
and was not to give the Value of fifteen Shillings for the Cure.
{Indian cure an Ulcer.}  Now, I am not positive, whether he wash'd the Ulcer
with any thing, before he used what I am now going to speak of,
which was nothing but the rotten doated Grains of Indian Corn,
beaten to Powder, and the soft Down growing on a Turkey's Rump.
This dry'd the Ulcer up immediately, and no other Fontanel was made
to discharge the Matter, he remaining a healthful Man,
till the time he had the Misfortune to be drown'd, which was many Years after.
{Cure in Maryland.}  Another Instance (not of my own Knowledge,
but I had it confirm'd by several Dwellers in Maryland,
where it was done) was, of an honest Planter that had been possess'd
with a strange Lingring Distemper, not usual amongst them,
under which he emaciated, and grew every Month worse than another,
it having held him several Years, in which time he had made Tryal
of several Doctors, as they call them, which, I suppose, were Ship-Surgeons.
In the beginning of this Distemper, the Patient was very well to pass,
and was possess'd of several Slaves, which the Doctors purged all away,
and the poor Man was so far from mending, that he grew worse and worse
every day.  But it happen'd, that, one day, as his Wife and he
were commiserating his miserable Condition, and that he could not expect
to recover, but look'd for Death very speedily, and condoling the Misery
he should leave his Wife and Family in, since all his Negro's were gone.
At that time, I say, it happen'd, that an Indian was in the same Room,
who had frequented the House for many Years, and so was become
as one of the Family, and would sometimes be at this Planter's House,
and at other times amongst the Indians.

This Savage, hearing what they talk'd of, and having a great Love
for the Sick Man, made this Reply to what he had heard.
`Brother, you have been a long time Sick; and, I know, you have
given away your Slaves to your English Doctors:  What made you do so,
and now become poor?  They do not know how to cure you;
for it is an Indian Distemper, which your People know not the Nature of.
If it had been an English Disease, probably they could have cured you;
and had you come to me at first, I would have cured you for a small matter,
without taking away your Servants that made Corn for you and your Family
to eat; and yet, if you will give me a Blanket to keep me warm,
and some Powder and Shot to kill Deer withal, I will do my best
to make you well still.'  The Man was low in Courage and Pocket too,
and made the Indian this Reply.  `Jack, my Distemper is past Cure,
and if our English Doctors cannot cure it, I am sure, the Indians cannot.'
But his Wife accosted her Husband in very mild terms, and told him,
he did not know, but God might be pleased to give a Blessing
to that Indian's Undertaking more than he had done to the English;
and farther added; `if you die, I cannot be much more miserable,
by giving this small matter to the Indian; so I pray you, my Dear,
take my Advice, and try him;' to which, by her Persuasions, he consented.
After the Bargain was concluded, the Indian went into the Woods,
and brought in both Herbs and Roots, of which he made a Decoction,
and gave it the Man to drink, and bad him go to bed, saying,
it should not be long, before he came again, which the Patient perform'd
as he had ordered; and the Potion he had administred made him sweat
after the most violent manner that could be, whereby he smell'd
very offensively both to himself, and they that were about him;
but in the Evening, towards Night, Jack came, with a great Rattle-Snake
in his Hand alive, which frightned the People almost out of their Senses;
{Cure by a Snake.} and he told his Patient, that he must take that
to Bed to him; at which the Man was in a great Consternation,
and told the Indian, he was resolv'd, to let no Snake come into his Bed,
for he might as well die of the Distemper he had, as be kill'd
with the Bite of that Serpent.  To which the Indian reply'd,
he could not bite him now, nor do him any Harm; for he had taken out
his Poison-teeth, and shew'd him, that they were gone.  At last,
with much Persuasion, he admitted the Snake's Company, which the Indian
put about his Middle, and order'd nobody to take him away upon any account,
which was strictly observ'd, although the Snake girded him as hard
for a great while, as if he had been drawn in by a Belt, which one pull'd at,
with all his strength.  At last, the Snake's Twitches grew weaker and weaker,
till, by degrees, he felt him not; and opening the Bed, he was found dead,
and the Man thought himself better.  The Indian came in the Morning,
and seeing the Snake dead, told the Man, that his Distemper was dead
along with that Snake, which prov'd so as he said; for the Man
speedily recover'd his Health, and became perfectly well.

{Spleen how cure.}
They cure the Spleen (which they are much addicted to) by burning with a Reed.
They lay the Patient on his Back, so put a hollow Cane into the Fire,
where they burn the End thereof, till it is very hot, and on Fire at the end.
Then they lay a Piece of thin Leather on the Patient's Belly,
between the Pit of the Stomach and the Navel, so press the hot Reed
on the Leather, which burns the Patient so that you may ever after see
the Impression of the Reed where it was laid on, which Mark never goes off
so long as he lives.  This is used for the Belly-Ach sometimes.
{Colouring of the Hair.}  They can colour their Hair black,
though sometimes it is reddish, which they do with the Seed of a Flower
that grows commonly in their Plantations.  I believe this would change
the reddest Hair into perfect black.  {Not many Tears, Rozins.}
They make use of no Minerals in their Physick, and not much of Animals;
but chiefly rely on Vegetables.  They have several Remedies for the Tooth-ach,
which often drive away the Pain; but if they fail, they have Recourse
to punching out the Tooth, with a small Cane set against the same,
on a Bit of Leather.  Then they strike the Reed, and so drive out the Tooth;
and howsoever it may seem to the Europeans, I prefer it before
the common way of drawing Teeth by those Instruments than endanger the Jaw,
and a Flux of Blood often follows, which this Method of a Punch
never is attended withal; neither is it half the Pain.
The Spontaneous Plants of America the Savages are well acquainted withal;
and a Flux of Blood never follows any of their Operations.
They are wholly Strangers to Amputation, and for what natural Issues of Blood
happen immoderately, they are not to seek for a certain and speedy Cure.
Tears, Rozins, and Gums, I have not discover'd that they make much use of;
And as for Purging and Emeticks, so much in fashion with us,
they never apply themselves to, {Yaupon.} unless in drinking
vast Quantities of their Yaupon or Tea, and vomiting it up again,
as clear as they drink it.  This is a Custom amongst all those
that can procure that Plant, in which manner they take it every other Morning,
or oftner; by which Method they keep their Stomachs clean,
without pricking the Coats, and straining Nature, as every Purge
is an Enemy to.  Besides, the great Diuretick Quality of their Tea
carries off a great deal, that perhaps might prejudice their Health,
by Agues, and Fevers, which all watry Countries are addicted to;
for which reason, I believe, it is, that the Indians are not so much
addicted to that Distemper, as we are, they preventing its seizing upon them,
by this Plant alone.  Moreover, I have remark'd, that it is only those Places
bordering on the Ocean and great Rivers, that this Distemper is frequent in,
and only on and near the same Places this Evergreen is to be found;
and none up towards the Mountains, where these Agues seldom or never appear;
Nature having provided suitable Remedies, in all Countries,
proper for the Maladies that are common thereto.  The Savages of Carolina
have this Tea in Veneration, above all the Plants they are acquainted withal,
and tell you, the Discovery thereof was by an infirm Indian,
that labour'd under the Burden of many rugged Distempers,
and could not be cured by all their Doctors; so, one day,
he fell asleep, and dreamt, that if he took a Decoction of the Tree
that grew at his Head, he would certainly be cured; upon which he awoke,
and saw the Yaupon or Cassena-Tree, which was not there
when he fell asleep.  He follow'd the Direction of his Dream,
and became perfectly well in a short time.  Now, I suppose,
no Man has so little Sense as to believe this Fable; yet it lets us see
what they intend thereby, and that it has, doubtless, work'd Feats enough,
to gain it such an Esteem amongst these Savages, who are too well versed
in Vegetables, to be brought to a continual use of any one of them,
upon a meer Conceit or Fancy, without some apparent Benefit
they found thereby; especially, when we are sensible,
they drink the Juices of Plants, to free Nature of her Burdens,
and not out of Foppery and Fashion, as other Nations are oftentimes
found to do.  Amongst all the Discoveries of America,
by the Missionaries of the French and Spaniards, I wonder none of them
was so kind to the World, as to have kept a Catalogue of the Distempers
they found the Savages capable of curing, and their Method of Cure;
which might have been of some Advantage to our Materia Medica at home,
when deliver'd by Men of Learning, and other Qualifications,
as most of them are.  Authors generally tell us, that the Savages
are well enough acquainted with those Plants which their Climate affords,
and that some of them effect great Cures, but by what Means,
and in what Form, we are left in the dark.  {Sassafras.}
The Bark of the Root of the Sassafras-Tree, I have observ'd,
is much used by them.  They generally torrefy it in the Embers,
so strip off the Bark from the Root, beating it to a Consistence
fit to spread, so lay it on the griev'd Part; which both cleanses
a fowl Ulcer; and after Scarrification, being apply'd to a Contusion,
or Swelling, draws forth the Pain, and reduces the Part to its pristine
State of Health, as I have often seen effected.  Fats and Unguents
never appear in their Chirurgery, when the Skin is once broke.
The Fats of Animals are used by them, to render their Limbs pliable,
and when wearied, to relieve the Joints, and this not often,
because they approve of the Sweating-House (in such cases) above all things.
{Make Bread, how.  Alkali Salts.}  The Salts they mix
with their Bread and Soupe, to give them a Relish, are Alkalis,
(viz.) Ashes, and calcined Bones of Deer, and other Animals.
{No Sallads, Pepper, or Mustard.}  Sallads, they never eat any;
as for Pepper and Mustard, they reckon us little better than Madmen,
to make use of it amongst our Victuals.  They are never troubled
with the Scurvy, Dropsy, nor Stone.  The Phthisick, Asthma, and Diabetes,
they are wholly Strangers to; neither do I remember I ever saw
one Paralytick amongst them.  The Gout, I cannot be certain
whether they know what it is, or not.  Indeed, I never saw
any Nodes or Swellings, which attend the Gout in Europe;
{Rhumatick Pains.} yet they have a sort of Rhumatism or Burning of the Limbs,
which tortures them grievously, at which time their Legs are so hot,
that they employ the young People continually to pour Water down them.
I never saw but one or two thus afflicted.  The Struma is not uncommon
amongst these Savages, and another Distemper, which is, in some respects,
like the Pox, but is attended with no Gonorrhoea.  This not seldom
bereaves them of their Nose.  I have seen three or four of them
render'd most miserable Spectacles by this Distemper.
Yet, when they have been so negligent, as to let it run on so far
without curbing of it; at last, they make shift to patch themselves up,
and live for many years after; and such Men commonly turn Doctors.
I have known two or three of these no-nose Doctors in great Esteem
amongst these Savages.  The Juice of the Tulip-Tree is used
as a proper Remedy for this Distemper.  What Knowledge they have in Anatomy,
I cannot tell, neither did I ever see them employ themselves therein,
unless, as I told you before, when they make the Skeletons
of their Kings and great Mens Bones.

The Indians are very careless and negligent of their Health;
as, by Drunkenness, Wading in the Water, irregular Diet and Lodging,
and a thousand other Disorders, (that would kill an European)
which they daily use.  They boil and roast their Meat extraordinary much,
and eat abundance of Broth, {Naked Indians.} except the Savages
whom we call the naked Indians, who never eat any Soupe.
They travel from the Banks of the Messiasippi, to war against
the Sinnagars or Iroquois, and are (if equal Numbers)
commonly too hard for them.  They will lie and sleep in the Woods
without Fire, being inur'd thereto.  They are the hardiest of all Indians,
and run so fast, that they are never taken, neither do any Indians
outrun them, if they are pursu'd.  Their Savage Enemies say,
their Nimbleness and Wind proceeds from their never eating any Broth.
{Small-Pox.}  The Small-Pox has been fatal to them; they do not often escape,
when they are seiz'd with that Distemper, which is a contrary Fever
to what they ever knew.  Most certain, it had never visited America,
before the Discovery thereof by the Christians.  Their running into the Water,
in the Extremity of this Disease, strikes it in, and kills all that use it.
Now they are become a little wiser; but formerly it destroy'd whole Towns,
without leaving one Indian alive in the Village.  The Plague was never known
amongst them, that I could learn by what Enquiry I have made:
These Savages use Scarrification almost in all Distempers.
Their chief Instruments for that Operation is the Teeth of Rattle-Snakes,
which they poison withal.  They take them out of the Snake's Head,
and suck out the Poison with their Mouths, (and so keep them for use)
and spit out the Venom, which is green, and are never damag'd thereby.
The Small-Pox and Rum have made such a Destruction amongst them,
that, on good grounds, I do believe, there is not the sixth Savage living
within two hundred Miles of all our Settlements, as there were
fifty Years ago.  These poor Creatures have so many Enemies to destroy them,
that it's a wonder one of them is left alive near us.  The Small-pox
I have acquainted you withal above, and so I have of Rum, and shall only add,
that they have got a way to carry it back to the Westward Indians,
who never knew what it was, till within very few Years.  Now they have it
brought them by the Tuskeruro's, and other Neighbour-Indians,
but the Tuskeruro's chiefly, who carry it in Rundlets several hundred Miles,
amongst other Indians.  Sometimes they cannot forbear breaking their Cargo,
but sit down in the Woods, and drink it all up, and then hollow and shout
like so many Bedlamites.  I accidentally once met with one of these
drunken Crews, and was amaz'd to see a Parcel of drunken Savages
so far from any Englishman's House; but the Indians I had in Company
inform'd me, that they were Merchants, and had drunk all their Stock,
as is very common for them to do.  But when they happen to carry it safe,
(which is seldom, without drinking some part of it, and filling it up
with Water) and come to an Indian Town, those that buy Rum of them
have so many Mouthfuls for a Buck-Skin, they never using any other Measure;
and for this purpose, the Buyer always makes Choice of his Man,
which is one that has the greatest Mouth, whom he brings to the Market
with a Bowl to put it in.  The Seller looks narrowly to the Man's Mouth
that measures it, and if he happens to swallow any down,
either through Wilfulness or otherwise, the Merchant or some of his Party,
does not scruple to knock the Fellow down, exclaiming against him
for false Measure.  Thereupon, the Buyer finds another Mouthpiece
to measure the Rum by; so that this Trading is very agreeable
to the Spectators, to see such a deal of Quarrelling and Controversy,
as often happens, about it, and is very diverting.

{Poisoning of Taylor.}
Another Destroyer of them, is, the Art they have, and often practise,
of poisoning one another; which is done by a large, white, spungy Root,
that grows in the Fresh-Marshes, which is one of their Poisons;
not but that they have many other Drugs, which they poison one another withal.

{How the Indians war.}
Lastly, the continual Wars these Savages maintain, one Nation against another,
which sometimes hold for some Ages, killing and making Captives,
till they become so weak thereby, that they are forced to make Peace
for want of Recruits, to supply their Wars; and the Difference of Languages,
that is found amongst these Heathens, seems altogether strange.
For it often appears, that every dozen Miles, you meet with an Indian Town,
that is quite different from the others you last parted withal;
and what a little supplies this Defect is, that the most powerful
Nation of these Savages scorns to treat or trade with any others
(of fewer Numbers and less Power) in any other Tongue but their own,
which serves for the Lingua of the Country, with which we travel and deal;
as for Example, we see that the Tuskeruro's are most numerous
in North-Carolina, therefore their Tongue is understood by some
in every Town of all the Indians near us.  And here I shall insert
a small Dictionary of every Tongue, though not Alphabetically digested.



      English.            Tuskeruro.          Pampticough.        Woccon.
  One                 Unche               Weembot             Tonne
  Two                 Necte               Neshinnauh          Num-perra  (rra?)
  Three               Ohs-sah             Nish-wonner         Nam-mee
  Four                Untoc               Yau-Ooner           Punnum-punne  (e?)
  Five                Ouch-who            Umperren            Webtau
  Six                 Houeyoc             Who-yeoc            Is-sto  (st?)
  Seven               Chauh-noc           Top-po-osh          Nommis-sau
  Eight               Nec-kara            Nau-haush-shoo      Nupsau
  Nine                Wearah              Pach-ic-conk        Weihere
  Ten                 Wartsauh            Cosh                Soone noponne
  Eleven              Unche scauwhau                          Tonne hauk pea
  Twelve              Nectec scaukhau                         Soone nomme
  Twenty              Wartsau scauhau                         Winnop
  Thirty              Ossa te wartsau
  Hundred             Youch se
  Thousand            Ki you se

  Rum                 Oonaquod            Weesaccon           Yup-se
  Blankets            Oorewa              Mattosh             Roo-iune
  White               Ware-occa           Wop-poshaumosh      Waurraupa
  Red                 Cotcoo-rea          Mish-cock  (ck?)    Yauta
  Black or            Caw-hunshe          Mow-cottowosh       Yah-testea
  Blue, idem
  Gunpowder           Ou-ku               Pungue              Rooeyam
  Shot                Cauna               Ar-rounser          Week
  Axe                 Au-nuka             Tomma-hick          Tau-unta winnik
  Knife               Oosocke nauh        Rig-cosq            Wee
  Tobacco             Charho              Hooh-pau            Uu-coone
  Shirt               Ough-tre's                              Tacca pitteneer
  Shoes               Oo-ross-soo                             Wee-kessoo
  Hat                 Trossa              Mottau-quahan       Intome-posswa
  Fire                Utchar              Tinda               Yau
  Water               Awoo                Umpe                Ejau
  Coat                Ouswox              Taus-won            Rummissau
                      Kawhitchra
  Awl or              Oose-waure          Moc-cose            Wonsh-shee
  Needle
  A Hoe               Wauche-wocnoc       Rosh-shocquon       Rooe-pau
  Salt                Cheek-ha
  Paint               Quaunt              Chuwon              Whooyeonne
  Ronoak              Nauh-houreot        Mis-kis-'su         Rummaer
  Peak                Chu-teche           Ronoak              Erroco
  Gun                 Auk-noc             Gau hooptop         Wittape
  Gun-Lock            Oo-teste            Gun tock Seike      Noonkosso
  Flints              Ou-negh-ra          Hinds               Matt-teer
  A Flap              Oukhaure            Rappatoc            Rhooeyau
  Belt                Oona-teste          Maachone            Wee-kau
  Scissors and        Cheh-ra                                 Toc-koor
  Tobacco-Tongues
  A Kettle            Oowaiana                                Tooseawau
  A Pot               Ocnock
  Acorns              Kooawa                                  Roosomme
  A Pine-Tree         Heigta              Oonossa             Hooheh
  Englishman          Nickreruroh         Tosh shonte         Wintsohore
  Indians             Unqua               Nuppin              Yauh-he
      English.            Tuskeruro.          Woccon.
  A Horse             A hots              Yenwetoa
  Swine               Watsquerre          Nommewarraupau
  Moss                Auoona hau          Itto
  Raw skin undrest    Ootahawa            Teep
  Buckskin            Ocques              Rookau
  Fawn-skin           Ottea               Wisto
  Bear-skin           Oochehara           Ourka
  Fox-skin            Che-chou            Hannatockore
  Raccoon-skin        Roo-sotto           Auher
  Squirrel-skin       Sost                Yehau
  Wildcat-skin        Cauhauweana
  Panther-skin        Caunerex            Wattau
  Wolf                Squarrena           Tire kiro
  Minx                Chac-kauene         Soccon
  Otter               Chaunoc             Wetkes
  A Mat               Ooyethne            Soppepepor
  Basket              Ooyaura             Rookeppa
  Feathers            Oosnooqua           Soppe
  Drest-skin          Cotcoo              Rauhau
  A Turkey            Coona               Yauta
  A Duck              Sooeau              Welka
  A King              Teethha             Roamore
  Fat                 Ootsaure            Yendare
  Soft                Utsauwanne          Roosomme
  Hard or heavy       Waucots ne          Itte teraugh
  A Rope              Utsera              Trauhe
  A Possum            Che-ra
  Day                 Ootauh-ne
  A Pestel            Tic-caugh-ne        Miyau
  A Mortar            Ootic caugh-ne      Yossoo
  Stockings           Way haushe
  A Creek             Wackena
  A River             Ahunt wackena
  A Man               Entequos
  Old Man             Occooahawa
  Young Man           Quottis
  Woman               Con-noowa
  Old Woman           Cusquerre           Yicau
  Wife                Kateocca            Yecauau
  A Child             Woccanookne
  A Boy               Wariaugh
  Infant              Utserosta
  Ears                Ooethnat
  Fishgig             Ootosne             Weetipsa
  A Comb              Oonaquitchra        Sacketoome posswa
  A Cake bak't        Ooneck
  A Head              Ootaure             Poppe
  Hair                Oowaara             Tumme
  Brother             Caunotka            Yenrauhe
  I                   Ee
  Thou                Eets
  There               Ka
  Homine              Cotquerre           Roocauwa
  Bread               Ootocnare           Ikettau
  Broath              Ook-hoo
  Corn                Oonaha              Cose
                      Oonave
                      Oosare
                      Oosha
  Pease               Saugh-he            Coosauk
  A Bag               Uttaqua             Ekoocromon
  Fish                Cunshe              Yacunne
  A Louse             Cheecq;             Eppesyau
  A Flea              Nauocq;
  Potato's            Untone              Wauk
  A Stick             Chinqua
  Wood                Ouyunkgue           Yonne
  House               Ounouse  (Oin?)     Ouke
  A Cow               Ous-sarunt          Nappinjure
  A Snake             Us-quauh-ne         Yau-hauk
  A Rat               Rusquiane           Wittau
  A Goose             Au-hoohaha          Auhaun
  A Swan              Oorhast             Atter
  Allegator           Utsererauh          Monwittetau
  A Crab              Rouare cou          Wunneau
  A Canoe             Ooshunnawa          Watt
  A Box               Ooanoo              Yopoonitsa
  A Bowl              Ortse               Cotsoe
  A Spoon             Oughquere           Cotsau
  A Path              Wauh-hauhne         Yauh
  Sun or Moon         Heita               Wittapare
  Wind                Hoonoch             Yuncor
  A Star              Uttewiraratse       Wattapi untakeer
  Rain                Untuch              Yawowa
                      Auhuntwood
  Night               Oosottoo            Yantoha
  A Rundlet           Oohunawa            Ynpyupseunne  (Yup?)
  An Eel              Cuhn-na
  A T---d             Utquera             Pulawa
  A F---t             Uttena              Pautyau
  A Cable             Utquichra
  Small Ropes         Utsera utquichra
  A Button            Tic-hah             Rummissauwoune
  Breeches            Wahunshe            Rooeyaukitte
  Stockings           Oowissera           Rooesoo possoo
  Day                 Wauwoc-hook         Waukhaway
  Mad                 Cosserunte          Rockcumne
  Angry               Cotcheroore         Roocheha
  Afraid              Werricauna          Reheshiwau
  Smoak               Oo-teighne          Too-she
  A Thief or Rogue    Katichhei
  A Dog               Cheeth              Tauh-he
  A Reed              Cauna               Weekwonne
  Lightwood           Kakoo               Sek
  To morrow           Jureha              Kittape
  Now                 Kahunk
  To day              Kawa
  A little while ago  Kakoowa             Yauka
      English.                           Tuskeruro.               Woccon.
  Yesterday                          Oousotto                 Yottoha
  How many                           Ut-tewots                Tontarinte
  How far                            Untateawa
  Will you go along with me          Unta hah                 Quauke
  Go you                             Its warko                Yuppa me
  Give it me                         Cotshau                  Mothei
  That's all                         Ut chat                  Cuttaune
  A Cubit length                     Kihoosocca               Ishewounaup
  Dead                               Whaharia                 Caure
  A Gourd or Bottle                  Utchaawa                 Wattape
  A lazy Fellow                      Wattattoo watse          Tontaunete
  Englishman is thirsty              Oukwockaninniwock
  I will sell you Goods very cheap   Wausthanocha             Nau hou hoore-ene
  All the Indians are drunk          Connaugh jost twane      Nonnupper
  Have you got any thing to eat      Utta-ana-wox             Noccoo Eraute
  I am sick                          Connauwox                Waurepa
  A Fish-Hook                        Oos-skinna
  Don't lose it                      Oon est nonne it quost
  A Tobacco-pipe                     Oosquaana                Intom
  I remember it                      Oonutsauka               Aucummato
  Let it alone                       Tnotsaurauweek  (Tout?)  Sauhau
  Peaches                            Roo-ooe                  Yonne
  Walnuts                            Rootau-ooe
  Hickery Nuts                       Rootau                   Nimmia
  A Jew's-Harp                       Ooratsa                  Wottiyau
  I forget it                        Merrauka
  Northwest-Wind                     Hothooka
  Snow.                              Acaunque.                Wawawa.

{Indian Speech.}
To repeat more of this Indian Jargon, would be to trouble the Reader;
and as an Account how imperfect they are in their Moods and Tenses,
has been given by several already, I shall only add, that their
Languages or Tongues are so deficient, that you cannot suppose
the Indians ever could express themselves in such a Flight of Stile,
as Authors would have you believe.  They are so far from it,
that they are but just able to make one another understand readily
what they talk about.  As for the two Consonants `L' and `F',
I never knew them in any Indian Speech I have met withal;
yet I must tell you, that they have such a Way of abbreviating their Speech,
when in their great Councils and Debates, that the young Men do not understand
what they treat about, when they hear them argue.  It is wonderful,
what has occasion'd so many different Speeches as the Savages have.
{Tartarian Hurds.}  The three Nations I now mention'd,
do not live above ten Leagues distant, and two of them,
viz. the Tuskeruro's and the Woccon, are not two Leagues asunder;
yet their Speech differs in every Word thereof, except one,
which is Tsaure, Cockles, which is in both Tongues the same,
and nothing else.  Now this Difference of Speech causes
Jealousies and Fears amongst them, which bring Wars, wherein they destroy
one another; otherwise the Christians had not (in all Probability)
settled America so easily, as they have done, had these Tribes of Savages
united themselves into one People or general Interest, or were they so
but every hundred Miles.  In short, they are an odd sort of People
under the Circumstances they are at present, and have some such uncouth Ways
in their Management and Course of Living, that it seems a Miracle to us,
how they bring about their Designs, as they do, when their Ways
are commonly quite contrary to ours.  I believe, they are (as to this Life)
a very happy People; and were it not for the Feuds amongst themselves,
they would enjoy the happiest State (in this World) of all Mankind.
They met with Enemies when we came amongst them; for they are
no nearer Christianity now, than they were at the first Discovery,
to all Appearance.  {Indians learn of the Europeans.}
They have learnt several Vices of the Europeans, but not one Vertue,
as I know of.  Drunkenness was a Stranger, when we found them out,
and Swearing their Speech cannot express; yet those that speak English,
learn to swear the first thing they talk of.  It's true,
they have some Vertues and some Vices; but how the Christians
can bring these People into the Bosom of the Church, is a Proposal
that ought to be form'd and follow'd by the wisest Heads and best Christians.
After I have given one Remark or two farther, of some of their
strange Practices and Notions, I will give my Opinion, how I think,
in probability, it may be (if possible) effected, and so shall conclude
this Treatise of Carolina.

They are a very craving People, and if a Man give them any thing of a Present,
they think it obliges him to give them another; and so on,
till he has given them all he has; for they have no Bounds of Satisfaction
in that way; and if they give you any thing, it is to receive
twice the Value of it.  They have no Consideration that you will want
what you give them; for their way of Living is so contrary to ours,
that neither we nor they can fathom one anothers Designs and Methods.
They call Rum and Physick by one Name, which implies that Rum
make People sick, as when they have taken any poisonous Plant;
yet they cannot forbear Rum.  They make Offerings of their First-Fruits,
and the more serious sort of them throw into the Ashes, near the Fire,
the first Bit or Spoonful of every Meal they sit down to, which, they say,
is the same to them, as the pulling off our Hats, and talking,
when we go to Victuals, is to us.  They name the Months very agreeably,
as one is the Herring-Month, another the Strawberry-Month,
another the Mulberry-Month.  Others name them by the Trees that blossom;
especially, the Dogwood-Tree; or they say, we will return
when Turkey-Cocks gobble, that is in March and April.  The Age of the Moon
they understand, but know no different Name for Sun and Moon.
They can guess well at the time of the Day, by the Sun's Height.
Their Age they number by Winters, and say, such a Man or Woman
is so many Winters old.  They have no Sabbath, or Day of Rest.
Their Slaves are not over-burden'd with Work, and so not driven by Severity
to seek for that Relief.  Those that are acquainted with the English,
and speak the Tongue, know when Sunday comes; besides, the Indians have
a distinct Name for Christmas which they call Winnick Keshuse,
or the Englishmans Gods Moon.  There is one most abominable Custom
amongst them, which they call Husquenawing their young Men;
which I have not made any Mention of as yet, so will give you
an Account of it here.  You must know, that most commonly, once a Year,
or, at farthest, once in two Years, these People take up
so many of their young Men, as they think are able to undergo it,
and husquenaugh them, which is to make them obedient and respective
to their Superiors, and (as they say) is the same to them,
as it is to us to send our Children to School, to be taught
good Breeding and Letters.  This House of Correction is a large strong Cabin,
made on purpose for the Reception of the young Men and Boys,
that have not passed this Graduation already; and it is always at Christmas
that they husquenaugh their Youth, which is by bringing them
into this House, and keeping them dark all the time, where they
more than half-starve them.  Besides, they give them Pellitory-Bark,
and several intoxicating Plants, that make them go raving mad
as ever were any People in the World; and you may hear them make
the most dismal and hellish Cries, and Howlings, that ever
humane Creatures express'd; all which continues about five or six Weeks,
and the little Meat they eat, is the nastiest, loathsome stuff,
and mixt with all manner of Filth it's possible to get.
After the Time is expired, they are brought out of the Cabin,
which never is in the Town, but always a distance off, and guarded by
a Jaylor or two, who watch by Turns.  Now, when they first come out,
they are as poor as ever any Creatures were; for you must know several die
under this diabolical Purgation.  Moreover, they either really are,
or pretend to be dumb, and do not speak for several Days;
I think, twenty or thirty; and look so gastly, and are so chang'd,
that it's next to an Impossibility to know them again,
although you was never so well acquainted with them before.
I would fain have gone into the mad House, and have seen them
in their time of Purgatory, but the King would not suffer it,
because, he told me, they would do me, or any other white Man, an Injury,
that ventured in amongst them; so I desisted.  They play this Prank
with Girls as well as Boys, and I believe it a miserable Life they endure,
because I have known several of them run away, at that time, to avoid it.
Now, the Savages say, if it was not for this, they could never keep
their Youth in Subjection, besides that it hardens them ever after
to the Fatigues of War, Hunting, and all manner of Hardship,
which their way of living exposes them to.  Besides, they add,
that it carries off those infirm weak Bodies, that would have been only
a Burden and Disgrace to their Nation, and saves the Victuals and Cloathing
for better People, that would have been expended on such useless Creatures.
These Savages are described in their proper Colours, but by a very few;
for those that generally write Histories of this new World,
are such as Interest, Preferment, and Merchandize, drew thither,
and know no more of that People than I do of the Laplanders,
which is only by Hear-say.  And if we will make just Remarks,
how near such Relations generally approach Truth and Nicety,
we shall find very few of them worthy of Entertainment; and as for
the other part of the Volume, it is generally stufft with Invectives
against the Government they lived under, on which Stage is commonly acted
greater Barbarities, in Murdering worthy Mens Reputations,
than all the Savages in the new World are capable of equalizing,
or so much as imitating.

And since I hinted at a Regulation of the Savages, and to propose a way
to convert them to Christianity, I will first particularize
the several Nations of Indians that are our Neighbours,
and then proceed to what I promis'd.

Tuskeruro Indians are fifteen Towns, viz. Haruta, Waqui, Contah-nah,
Anna Ooka, Conauh-Kare Harooka, Una Nauhan, Kentanuska, Chunaneets,
Kenta, Eno, Naur-hegh-ne, Oonossoora, Tosneoc, Nonawharitse, Nursoorooka;
Fighting Men 1200.  Waccon, Towns 2, Yupwauremau, Tooptatmeer,
Fighting Men 120.  Machapunga, Town 1, Maramiskeet, Fighting Men 30.
Bear River, Town 1, Raudauqua-quank, Fighting Men 50.
Maherring Indians, Town 1, Maherring River, Fighting Men 50.
Chuwon Indians, Town 1, Bennets Creek, Fighting Men 15.
Paspatank Indians, Town 1, Paspatank River, Fighting Men 10.
Poteskeit, Town 1, North River, Fighting Men 30.  Nottaway Indians,
Town 1, Winoack Creek, Fighting Men 30.  Hatteras Town 1, Sand Banks,
Fighting Men 16.  Connamox Indians, Towns 2, Coranine, Raruta,
Fighting Men 25.  Neus Indians, Towns 2, Chattooka, Rouconk,
Fighting Men 15.  Pampticough Indians, Town 1, Island, Fighting Men 15.
Jaupim Indians, 6 People.  These five Nations of the Totero's, Sapona's,
Keiauwee's, Aconechos, and Schoccories, are lately come amongst us,
and may contain, in all, about 750 Men, Women and Children.  Total 4780.

Now, there appears to be one thousand six hundred and twelve
Fighting Men, of our Neighbouring Indians; and probably,
there are three Fifths of Women and Children, not including Old Men,
which amounts to four thousand and thirty Savages, besides the five Nations
lately come.  Now, as I before hinted, we will see what grounds there are
to make these People serviceable to us, and better themselves thereby.

On a fair Scheme, we must first allow these Savages what really
belongs to them, that is, what good Qualities, and natural Endowments,
they possess, whereby they being in their proper Colours,
the Event may be better guess'd at, and fathom'd.

First, they are as apt to learn any Handicraft, as any People
that the World affords; I will except none; as is seen
by their Canoes and Stauking Heads, which they make of themselves;
but to my purpose, the Indian Slaves in South Carolina, and elsewhere,
make my Argument good.

Secondly, we have no disciplin'd Men in Europe, but what have,
at one time or other, been branded with Mutining, and Murmuring against
their Chiefs.  These Savages are never found guilty of that great Crime
in a Soldier; I challenge all Mankind to tell me of one Instance of it;
besides, they never prove Traitors to their Native Country,
but rather chuse Death than partake and side with the Enemy.

They naturally possess the Righteous Man's Gift; they are Patient
under all Afflictions, and have a great many other Natural Vertues,
which I have slightly touch'd throughout the Account of these Savages.

They are really better to us, than we are to them; they always give us
Victuals at their Quarters, and take care we are arm'd against
Hunger and Thirst:  We do not so by them (generally speaking)
but let them walk by our Doors Hungry, and do not often relieve them.
We look upon them with Scorn and Disdain, and think them little better
than Beasts in Humane Shape, though if well examined, we shall find that,
for all our Religion and Education, we possess more Moral Deformities,
and Evils than these Savages do, or are acquainted withal.

We reckon them Slaves in Comparison to us, and Intruders,
as oft as they enter our Houses, or hunt near our Dwellings.
But if we will admit Reason to be our Guide, she will inform us,
that these Indians are the freest People in the World,
and so far from being Intruders upon us, that we have abandon'd
our own Native Soil, to drive them out, and possess theirs;
neither have we any true Balance, in Judging of these poor Heathens,
because we neither give Allowance for their Natural Disposition,
nor the Sylvian Education, and strange Customs, (uncouth to us)
they lie under and have ever been train'd up to; these are false Measures
for Christians to take, and indeed no Man can be reckon'd a Moralist only,
who will not make choice and use, of better Rules to walk and act by:
We trade with them, it's true, but to what End?  Not to shew them
the Steps of Vertue, and the Golden Rule, to do as we would be done by.
No, we have furnished them with the Vice of Drunkenness,
which is the open Road to all others, and daily cheat them
in every thing we sell, and esteem it a Gift of Christianity,
not to sell to them so cheap as we do to the Christians,
as we call our selves.  Pray let me know where is there to be found
one Sacred Command or Precept of our Master, that counsels us
to such Behaviour?  Besides, I believe it will not appear,
but that all the Wars, which we have had with the Savages,
were occasion'd by the unjust Dealings of the Christians towards them.
I can name more than a few, which my own Enquiry has given me
a right Understanding of, and I am afraid the remainder
(if they come to the test) will prove themselves Birds of the same Feather.

{Indians Aversion to Christianity.}
As we are in Christian Duty bound, so we must act and behave ourselves
to these Savages, if we either intend to be serviceable in converting them
to the Knowledge of the Gospel, or discharge the Duty which every Man,
within the Pale of the Christian Church, is bound to do.
Upon this Score, we ought to shew a Tenderness for these Heathens
under the weight of Infidelity; let us cherish their good Deeds,
and, with Mildness and Clemency, make them sensible and forwarn them
of their ill ones; let our Dealings be just to them in every Respect,
and shew no ill Example, whereby they may think we advise them
to practise that which we will not be conformable to ourselves:
Let them have cheap Penniworths (without Guile in our Trading with them)
and learn them the Mysteries of our Handicrafts, as well as our Religion,
otherwise we deal unjustly by them.  But it is highly necessary
to be brought in Practice, which is, to give Encouragement
to the ordinary People, and those of a lower Rank, that they might marry
with these Indians, and come into Plantations, and Houses,
where so many Acres of Land and some Gratuity of Money,
(out of a publick Stock) are given to the new-married Couple;
and that the Indians might have Encouragement to send their Children
Apprentices to proper Masters, that would be kind to them, and make them
Masters of a Trade, whereby they would be drawn to live amongst us,
and become Members of the same Ecclesiastical and Civil Government
we are under; then we should have great Advantages to make daily Conversions
amongst them, when they saw that we were kind and just to them
in all our Dealings.  Moreover, by the Indians Marrying with the Christians,
and coming into Plantations with their English Husbands, or Wives,
they would become Christians, and their Idolatry would be quite forgotten,
and, in all probability, a better Worship come in its Stead;
for were the Jews engrafted thus, and alienated from
the Worship and Conversation of Jews, their Abominations would vanish,
and be no more.

Thus we should be let into a better Understanding of the Indian Tongue,
by our new Converts; and the whole Body of these People
would arrive to the Knowledge of our Religion and Customs,
and become as one People with us.  By this Method also, we should have
a true Knowledge of all the Indians Skill in Medicine and Surgery;
they would inform us of the Situation of our Rivers, Lakes,
and Tracts of Land in the Lords Dominions, where by their Assistance,
greater Discoveries may be made than has been hitherto found out,
and by their Accompanying us in our Expeditions, we might civilize
a great many other Nations of the Savages, and daily add to our Strength
in Trade, and Interest; so that we might be sufficiently enabled to conquer,
or maintain our Ground, against all the Enemies to the Crown of England
in America, both Christian and Savage.

What Children we have of theirs, to learn Trades, &c. ought to be put
into those Hands that are Men of the best Lives and Characters,
and that are not only strict Observers of their Religion,
but also of a mild, winning and sweet Disposition, that these Indian Parents
may often go and see how well their Children are dealt with,
which would much win them to our Ways of Living, Mildness being a Vertue
the Indians are in love withal, for they do not practise
beating and correcting their Children, as we do.  A general Complaint is,
that it seems impossible to convert these People to Christianity,
as, at first sight, it does; and as for those in New Spain, they have
the Prayer of that Church in Latin by Rote, and know the external Behaviour at
Mass and Sermons; yet scarce any of them are steady and abide with constancy
in good Works, and the Duties of the Christian Church.  We find that
the Fuentes and several other of the noted Indian Families about Mexico,
and in other parts of New Spain, had given several large Gifts
to the Altar, and outwardly seem'd fond of their new Religion;
yet those that were the greatest Zealots outwards, on a strict Enquiry,
were found guilty of Idolatry and Witchcraft; and this seems to proceed from
their Cohabiting, which, as I have noted before, gives Opportunities of Cabals
to recal their ancient pristine Infidelity and Superstitions.  They never
argue against our Religion, but with all imaginable Indifference own,
that it is most proper for us that have been brought up in it.

In my opinion, it's better for Christians of a mean Fortune
to marry with the Civiliz'd Indians, than to suffer
the Hardships of four or five years Servitude, in which they meet
with Sickness and Seasonings amidst a Crowd of other Afflictions,
which the Tyranny of a bad Master lays upon such poor Souls, all which
those acquainted with our Tobacco Plantations are not Strangers to.

This seems to be a more reasonable Method of converting the Indians,
than to set up our Christian Banner in a Field of Blood, as the Spaniards
have done in New Spain, and baptize one hundred with the Sword
for one at the Font.  Whilst we make way for a Christian Colony
through a Field of Blood, and defraud, and make away with those
that one day may be wanted in this World, and in the next appear against us,
we make way for a more potent Christian Enemy to invade us hereafter,
of which we may repent, when too late.





                                  The Second
                                    CHARTER
                                  Granted by
                               King CHARLES II.
                                    to the
                                  PROPRIETORS
                                      of
                                   CAROLINA




Charles II. by the Grace of God, &c.  Whereas by Our Letters Patents,
bearing Date the Four and Twentieth Day of March, in the Fifteenth Year
of Our Reign, We were Graciously Pleas'd to Grant unto Our right Trusty,
and right Well-beloved Cousin and Counsellor Edward Earl of Clarendon,
our High Chancellor of England, Our right Trusty, and right entirely Beloved
Cousin and Counsellor, George Duke of Albemarle, Master of our Horse,
Our right Trusty and Well Beloved William, now Earl of Craven,
our right Trusty and well-beloved Counsellor, John Lord Berkeley,
our right Trusty, and well-beloved Counsellor, Anthony Lord Ashley,
Chancellor of our Exchequer, our right Trusty and Well-beloved Counsellor
Sir George Carterett Knight and Baronet, Vice-Chamberlain of our Houshold,
Our right Trusty and well-beloved, Sir John Colleton Knight and Baronet,
and Sir William Berkeley Knight, all that Province, Territory,
or Tract of Ground, called Carolina, situate, lying and being within
our Dominions of America, Extending from the North End of the Island,
called Luke Island, which lyeth in the Southern Virginia Seas,
and within six and thirty Degrees of the Northern Latitude;
and to the West, as far as the South Seas; and so respectively
as far as the River of Mathias, which bordereth upon the Coast of Florida,
and within One and Thirty Degrees of the Northern Latitude, and so West
in a direct Line, as far as the South Seas aforesaid.

Now, know Ye, that We, at the Humble Request of the said Grandees
in the aforesaid Letters Patents named, and as a farther Mark
of Our especial Favour towards them, We are Graciously Pleased
to Enlarge Our said Grant unto them, according to the Bounds and Limits
hereafter Specifyed, and in Favour to the Pious and Noble Purpose
of the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle,
William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley,
Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley,
their Heirs and Assigns, all that Province, Territory, or Tract of Ground,
situate, lying, and being within Our Dominions of America aforesaid,
extending North and Westward, as far as the North End
of Carahtuke River, or Gulet, upon a streight Westerly Line,
to Wyonoake Creek, which lies within, or about the Degrees of Thirty Six,
and Thirty Minutes Northern Latitude, and so West, in a direct Line,
as far as the South Seas; and South and Westward, as far as
the Degrees of Twenty Nine Inclusive Northern Latitude,
and so West in a direct Line, as far as the South Seas;
together with all and singular Ports, Harbours, Bays, Rivers and Islets,
belonging unto the Province or Territory, aforesaid.  And also,
all the Soil, Lands, Fields, Woods, Mountains, Ferms, Lakes, Rivers,
Bays and Islets, situate, or being within the Bounds, or Limits,
last before mentioned; with the Fishing of all sorts of Fish,
Whales, Sturgeons, and all other Royal Fishes in the Sea, Bays,
Islets and Rivers, within the Premises, and the Fish therein taken;
together with the Royalty of the Sea, upon the Coast within
the Limits aforesaid.  And moreover, all Veins, Mines and Quarries,
as well discovered as not discover'd, of Gold, Silver,
Gems and Precious Stones, and all other whatsoever; be it of Stones, Metal,
or any other thing found, or to be found within the Province, Territory,
Islets and Limits aforesaid.

And furthermore, the Patronage and Advowsons of all the Churches and Chappels,
which as the Christian Religion shall encrease within the Province, Territory,
Isles and Limits aforesaid, shall happen hereafter to be erected;
together with Licence and Power to build and found Churches,
Chappels and Oratories in convenient and fit places, within the said
Bounds and Limits; and to cause them to be Dedicated and Consecrated,
according to the Ecclesiastical Laws of Our Kingdom of England;
together with all and singular, the like, and as ample Rights, Jurisdictions,
Privileges, Prerogatives, Royalties, Liberties, Immunities and Franchises,
of what Kind soever, within the Territory, Isles, Islets and Limits aforesaid.
To have, hold, use, exercise and enjoy the same, as amply, fully,
and in as ample Manner, as any Bishop of Durham in Our Kingdom of England,
ever heretofore had, held, used, or enjoyed, or of right ought, or could have,
use, or enjoy; and them the said Edward Earl of Clarendon,
George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven,
John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett,
Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley, their Heirs and Assigns;
We do by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors,
make, create and constitute the true and absolute Lords and Proprietors
of the said Province, or Territory, and of all other the Premises,
saving always the Faith, Allegiance and Sovereign Dominion due to Us,
our Heirs and Successors, for the same; to have, hold, possess and enjoy
the said Province, Territory, Islets, and all and singular,
other the Premises, to them the said Edward Earl of Clarendon,
George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven,
John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett,
Sir John Colleton and Sir William Berkeley, their Heirs and Assigns,
for Ever, to be holden of Us, Our Heirs and Successors,
as of Our Mannor of East Greenwich, in Kent, in free and common Soccage,
and not in Capite, or by Knights Service, yielding and paying yearly
to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, for the same, the fourth Part
of all Goods and Silver Oar, which within the Limits hereby Granted,
shall from Time to Time, happen to be found, over and besides the Yearly Rent
of Twenty Marks and the fourth part of the Gold and Silver Oar,
in and by the said recited Letters Patents reserved and payable.

And that the Province, or Territory hereby granted and described,
may be dignifyed with as large Titles and Privileges, as any other Parts
of our Dominions and Territories in that Region; Know ye, That We,
of our farther Grace, certain Knowledge and meer Motion,
have thought fit to annex the same Tract of Ground and Territory,
unto the same Province of Carolina; and out of the Fulness
of our Royal Power and Prerogative, We do for Us, our Heirs and Successors,
annex and unite the same to the said Province of Carolina.  And forasmuch
as We have made and ordained the aforesaid Edward Earl of Clarendon,
George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven,
John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett,
Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley, their Heirs and Assigns,
the true Lords and Proprietors of all the Province or Territory aforesaid;
Know ye therefore moreover, that We reposing especial Trust and Confidence
in their Fidelity, Wisdom, Justice and provident Circumspection for Us,
our Heirs and Successors, do grant full and absolute Power,
by virtue of these Presents, to them the said Edward Earl of Clarendon,
George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven,
John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Catterett,
Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley, and their Heirs and Assigns,
for the good and happy Government of the said whole Province or Territory,
full Power and Authority to erect, constitute, and make several Counties,
Baronies, and Colonies, of and within the said Provinces, Territories,
Lands and Hereditaments, in and by the said recited Letters Patents,
and these Presents, granted, or mentioned to be granted, as aforesaid,
with several and distinct Jurisdictions, Powers, Liberties and Privileges.
And also, to ordain, make and enact, and under their Seals,
to publish any Laws and Constitutions whatsoever, either appertaining to
the publick State of the said whole Province or Territory,
or of any distinct or particular County, Barony or Colony,
of or within the same, or to the private Utility of particular Persons,
according to their best Discretion, by and with the Advice,
Assent and Approbation of the Freemen of the said Province or Territory,
or of the Freemen of the County, Barony or Colony, for which
such Law or Constitution shall be made, or the greatest Part of them,
or of their Delegates or Deputies, whom for enacting of the said Laws,
when, and as often as need shall require, We will that the said
Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle,
William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley,
Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton and Sir William Berkeley,
and their Heirs or Assigns, shall from Time to Time, assemble in
such Manner and Form as to them shall seem best:  And the same Laws
duly to execute upon all People within the said Province or Territory,
County, Barony or Colony, and the Limits thereof, for the Time being,
which shall be constituted under the Power and Government of them,
or any of them, either sailing towards the said Province or Territory
of Carolina, or returning from thence towards England,
or any other of our, or foreign Dominions, by Imposition of Penalties,
Imprisonment, or any other Punishment:  Yea, if it shall be needful,
and the Quality of the Offence require it, by taking away
Member and Life, either by them, the said Edward Earl of Clarendon,
George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven,
John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett,
Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley, and their Heirs,
or by them or their Deputies, Lieutenants, Judges, Justices, Magistrates,
or Officers whatsoever, as well within the said Province, as at Sea,
in such Manner and Form, as unto the said Edward Earl of Clarendon,
George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven,
John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett,
Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley, and their Heirs,
shall seem most convenient:  Also, to remit, release, pardon and abolish,
whether before Judgment or after, all Crimes and Offences whatsoever,
against the said Laws; and to do all and every other Thing and Things,
which unto the compleat Establishment of Justice, unto Courts,
Sessions and Forms of Judicature, and Manners of proceedings therein,
do belong, altho' in these Presents, express Mention is not made thereof;
and by Judges, to him or them delegated to award, process, hold Please,
and determine in all the said Courts and Places of Judicature,
all Actions, Suits and Causes whatsoever, as well criminal as civil,
real, mixt, personal, or of any other Kind or Nature whatsoever:
Which Laws so as aforesaid, to be published, Our Pleasure is,
and We do enjoyn, require and command, shall be absolutely firm and available
in Law; and that all the Leige People of Us, our Heirs and Successors,
within the said Province or Territory, do observe and keep the same inviolably
in those Parts, so far as they concern them, under the Pains and Penalties
therein expressed; or to be expressed; provided nevertheless,
that the said Laws be consonant to Reason, and as near as may be conveniently,
agreeable to the Laws and Customs of this our Realm of England.

And because such Assemblies of Free-holders cannot be so suddenly called,
as there may be Occasion to require the same; We do therefore
by these Presents, give and grant unto the said Edward Earl of Clarendon,
George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven,
John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett,
Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley, their Heirs and Assigns,
by themselves or their Magistrates in that Behalf, lawfully authorized,
full Power and Authority from Time to Time, to make and ordain
fit and wholsome Orders and Ordinances, within the Province
or Territory aforesaid, or any County, Barony or Province, of or within
the same, to be kept and observed, as well for the keeping of the Peace,
as for the better Government of the People there abiding, and to publish
the same to all to whom it may concern:  Which Ordinances we do,
by these Presents, streightly charge and command to be inviolably observed
within the same Province, Counties, Territories, Baronies, and Provinces,
under the Penalties therein expressed; so as such Ordinances
be reasonable and not repugnant or contrary, but as near as may be agreeable
to the Laws and Statutes of this our Kingdom of England;
and so as the same Ordinances do not extend to the binding,
charging or taking away of the Right or Interest of any Person or Persons,
in their freehold Goods, or Chattels, whatsoever.

And to the end the said Province or Territory, may be the more happily
encreased by the Multitude of People resorting thither, and may likewise be
the more strongly defended from the Incursions of Savages and other Enemies,
Pirates, and Robbers.

Therefore, We for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do give and grant
by these Presents, Power, License and Liberty unto all the Leige People of Us,
our Heirs and Successors in our Kingdom of England, or elsewhere,
within any other our Dominions, Islands, Colonies or Plantations;
(excepting those who shall be especially forbidden) to transport
themselves and Families into the said Province or Territory,
with convenient Shipping, and fitting Provisions; and there
to settle themselves, dwell and inhabit, any Law, Act, Statute, Ordinance,
or other Thing to the contrary in any wise, notwithstanding.

And we will also, and of Our especial Grace, for Us, our Heirs and Successors,
do streightly enjoyn, ordain, constitute and demand, That the said
Province or Territory, shall be of our Allegiance; and that all and singular,
the Subjects and Leige People of Us, our Heirs and Successors, transported,
or to be transported into the said Province, and the Children of them,
and such as shall descend from them, there born, or hereafter to be born,
be, and shall be Denizens and Lieges of Us, our Heirs and Successors of this
our Kingdom of England, and be in all Things, held, treated and reputed
as the Liege faithful People of Us, our Heirs and Successors,
born within this our said Kingdom, or any other of our Dominions;
and may inherit, or otherwise purchase and receive, take, hold,
buy and possess any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, within the said Places,
and them may occupy, and enjoy, sell, alien and bequeath; as likewise,
all Liberties, Franchises and Privileges of this our Kingdom,
and of other our Dominions aforesaid, may freely and quietly have,
possess and enjoy, as our Liege People born within the same,
without the Molestation, Vexation, Trouble or Grievance of Us,
Our Heirs and Successors, any Act, Statute, Ordinance, or Provision
to the contrary, notwithstanding.

And furthermore, That Our Subjects of this Our said Kingdom of England,
and other our Dominions, may be the rather encouraged to undertake
this Expedition, with ready and chearful Minds; Know Ye, That We,
of Our especial Grace, certain Knowledge and meer Motion, do give and grant,
by virtue of these Presents, as well to the said Edward Earl of Clarendon,
George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven,
John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett,
Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley, and their Heirs,
as unto all others as shall, from time to time, repair unto
the said Province or Territory, with a Purpose to inhabit there,
or to trade with the Natives thereof; Full Liberty and License
to lade and freight in every Port whatsoever, of Us, our Heirs and Successors;
and into the said Province of Carolina, by them, their Servants and Assigns,
to transport all and singular, their Goods, Wares and Merchandizes;
as likewise, all sort of Grain whatsoever, and any other Thing whatsoever,
necessary for their Food and Cloathing, not prohibited
by the Laws and Statutes of our Kingdom and Dominions, to be carried out
of the same, without any Lett or Molestation of Us, our Heirs and Successors,
or of any other our Officers or Ministers whatsoever; saving also to Us,
our Heirs and Successors, the Customs, and other Duties and Payments due for
the said Wares and Merchandizes, according to the several Rates of the Place
from whence the same shall be transported.

We will also, and by these Presents, for Us, our Heirs and Successors,
do give and grant License by this our Charter, unto the said
Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle,
William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley,
Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley,
their Heirs and Assigns, and to all the Inhabitants and Dwellers
in the Province or Territory aforesaid, both present and to come,
full Power and Authority to import or unlade by themselves,
or their Servants, Factors or Assigns, all Merchandizes and Goods whatsoever,
that shall arise of the Fruits and Commodities of the said
Province or Territory, either by Land or Sea, into any the Ports of Us,
our Heirs and Successors, in our Kingdom of Engl. Scotl. or Ireland,
or otherwise, to dispose of the said Goods, in the said Ports.
And if need be, within one year next after the unlading,
to lade the said Merchandizes and Goods again in the same,
or other Ships; and to export the same into any other Countries,
either of our Dominions or foreign, being in Amity with Us,
our Heirs and Successors, so as they pay such Customs,
Subsidies and other Duties for the same to Us, our Heirs and Successors,
as the rest of our Subjects of this our Kingdom, for the Time being,
shall be bound to pay.  Beyond which We will not that the Inhabitants
of the said Province or Territory, shall be any ways charged.
Provided, nevertheless, and our Will and Pleasure is, and we have further,
for the Considerations aforesaid, of our special Grace,
certain Knowledge and meer Motion, given and granted, and by these Presents,
for Us, our Heirs and Successors, do give and grant unto
the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle,
William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley,
Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley,
their Heirs and Assigns, full and free License, Liberty, Power and Authority,
at any Time or Times, from and after the Feast of St. Michael
the Arch-Angel, which shall be in the Year of our Lord Christ,
One Thousand, Six Hundred, Sixty and Seven; as well to import and bring into
any our Dominions from the said Province of Carolina, or any Part thereof,
the several Goods and Commodities herein after mentioned; That is to say,
Silks, Wines, Currants, Raisons, Capers, Wax, Almonds, Oil and Olives,
without paying or answering to Us, our Heirs and Successors,
any Custom, Impost, or other Duty, for, or in respect thereof,
for and during the Time and Space of Seven Years to commence and be accompted
from and after the first Importation of Four Tons of any the said Goods,
in any one Bottom Ship or Vessel, from the said Province or Territory,
into any of our Dominions; as also, to export and carry out of
any of our Dominions into the said Province or Territory, Custom-free,
all sorts of Tools, which shall be useful or necessary for the Planters there,
in the Accommodation and Improvement of the Premises, any thing
before in these Presents contained, or any Law, Act, Statute,
Prohibition, or other Matter or Thing, heretofore had, made,
enacted or provided, or hereafter to be had, made, enacted or provided,
in any wise notwithstanding.

And furthermore, of our more ample and especial Grace,
certain Knowledge and meer Motion, We do for Us, our Heirs and Successors,
grant unto the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle,
William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley,
Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley,
their Heirs and Assigns, full and absolute Power and Authority to make,
erect and constitute within the said Province or Territory,
and the Isles and Islets aforesaid, such and so many Sea-Ports, Harbours,
Creeks and other Places for discharge and unlading of Goods and Merchandizes
out of Ships, Boats, and other Vessels, and for lading of them
in such and so many Places, as with such Jurisdictions,
Privileges and Franchises, unto the said Ports belonging,
as to them shall seem most expedient; And that all and singular,
the Ships, Boats and other Vessels, which shall come for Merchandizes,
and trade into the said Province or Territory, or shall depart
out of the same, shall be laden and unladen at such Ports only,
as shall be erected and constituted by the said Edward Earl of Clarendon,
George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven,
John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett,
Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley, their Heirs and Assigns,
and not elsewhere, any Use, Custom, or any thing to the contrary
in any wise notwithstanding.

And we do furthermore will, appoint and ordain, and by these Presents,
for Us, our Heirs and Successors, do grant unto the said
Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle,
William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley,
Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton and Sir William Berkeley,
their Heirs and Assigns, That they the said Edward Earl of Clarendon,
George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven,
John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett,
Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley, their Heirs and Assigns,
may from Time to Time, for ever, have and enjoy the Customs and Subsidies in
the Ports, Harbours, Creeks and other Places, within the Province aforesaid,
payable for the Goods, Merchandizes and Wares there laded,
or to be laded or unladed, the said Customs to be reasonably assessed
upon any Occasion by themselves, and by and with the Consent
of the free People, or the greater Part of them, as aforesaid;
to whom We give Power by these Presents, for Us, our Heirs and Successors,
upon just Cause and in a due Proportion to assess and impose the same.

And further, of our especial Grace, certain Knowledge and meer Motion,
we have given, granted and confirmed, and by these Presents,
for Us, our Heirs and Successors, do give, grant and confirm
unto the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle,
William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley,
Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley,
their Heirs and Assigns, full and absolute Power, License and Authority,
that they the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle,
William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley,
Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley,
their Heirs and Assigns, from Time to Time, hereafter for ever,
at his and their Will and Pleasure, may assign, alien, grant,
demise or enfeoff the Premises or any Part or Parcel thereof to him or them,
that shall be willing to purchase the same; and to such Person and Persons,
as they shall think fit, to have, and to hold to them the said
Person or Persons, their Heirs and Assigns, in Fee simple or in Fee Tayle,
or for the Term of Life or Lives, or Years to be held of them,
the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle,
William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley,
Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley,
their Heirs and Assigns, by such Rents, Services and Customs,
as shall seem fit to them the said Edward Earl of Clarendon,
George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven,
John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett,
Sir John Colleton, and William Berkeley, their Heirs and Assigns,
and not of Us, our Heirs and Successors:  And to the same Person and Persons,
and to all and every of them, We do give and grant by these Presents,
for Us, our Heirs and Successors, License, Authority and Power,
that such Person or Persons, may have and take the Premises,
or any Parcel thereof, of the said Edward Earl of Clarendon,
George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven,
John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett,
Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley, their Heirs and Assigns,
and the same to hold to themselves, their Heirs or Assigns,
in what Estate of Inheritance soever, in Fee simple, or in Fee Tayle,
or otherwise, as to them the said Edward Earl of Clarendon,
George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven,
John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett,
Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley, their Heirs and Assigns,
shall seem expedient; The Statute in the Parliament of Edward,
Son of King Henry, heretofore King of England, our Predecessor,
commonly called, The Statute of Quia Emptores Terrar; or any other Statute,
Act, Ordinance, Use, Law, Custom, any other Matter, Cause or Thing
heretofore published or provided to the contrary, in any wise notwithstanding.

And because many Persons born and inhabiting in the said Province
for their Deserts and Services may expect, and be capable of
Marks of Honour and Favour, which, in respect of the great Distance
cannot conveniently be conferred by Us; our Will and Pleasure therefore is,
and We do by these Presents, give and grant unto the said
Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle,
William Lord Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley,
Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley,
their Heirs and Assigns, full Power and Authority to give and confer unto,
and upon such of the Inhabitants of the said Province, or Territory,
as they shall think, do, or shall merit the same, such Marks of Favour,
and Titles of Honour, as they shall think fit, so as their Titles of Honours
be not the same as are enjoyed by, or conferred upon any of the Subjects
of this Our Kingdom of England.

And further also, We do by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors,
give and Grant, License to them the Edward Earl of Clarendon,
George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven,
John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett,
Sir John Colleton and Sir William Berkeley, their Heirs and Assigns,
full Power, Liberty and License, to Erect, Raise and Build
within the said Province and Places aforesaid, or any Part or Parts thereof,
such and so many Forts, Fortresses, Castles, Cities, Boroughs,
Towns, Villages and other Fortifications whatsoever;
and the same or any of them to Fortify and Furnish with Ordnance,
Powder, Shot, Armour and all other Weapons, Ammunition and Habiliments of War,
both Defensive and Offensive, as shall be thought fit and convenient for
the Safety and Welfare of the said Province, and Places, or any Part thereof;
and the same, or any of them, from Time to Time, as Occasion shall require,
to Dismantle, Disfurnish, Demolish and Pull down; And also to Place,
Constitute and Appoint in, or over all, or any of the said Castles,
Forts, Fortifications, Cities, Towns and Places aforesaid,
Governours, Deputy Governours, Magistrates, Sheriffs and other Officers,
Civil and Military, as to them shall seem meet; and to the said Cities,
Boroughs, Towns, Villages, or any other Place or Places, within the said
Province or Territory, to Grant Letters or Charters of Incorporation,
with all Liberties, Franchises and Privileges requisite, or usual,
to, or within this our Kingdom of England granted, or belonging;
And in the same Cities, Boroughs, Towns and other Places, to Constitute,
Erect and Appoint such, and so many Markets, Marts and Fairs
as shall in that Behalf be thought fit and necessary; And further also,
to Erect and Make in the Province or Territory aforesaid, or any Part thereof,
so many Mannors with such Signories as to them shall seem meet and convenient,
and in every of the same Mannors to have and to hold a Court-Baron,
with all Things whatsoever, which to a Court-Baron do belong,
and to have and to hold Views of Frank Pledge, and Court-Leet,
for the Conservation of the Peace, and better Government of those Parts,
with such Limits, Jurisdiction and Precincts, as by the said
Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle,
William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley,
Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley,
or their Heirs, shall be appointed for that purpose, with all
things whatsoever, which to a Court-Leet, or view of Franck Pledge, do belong;
the same Courts to be holden by Stewards, to be Deputed and Authorized
by the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle,
William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley,
Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley,
or their Heirs, by the Lords of the Mannors and Leets, for the Time being,
when the same shall be Erected.

And because that in so remote a Country, and Situate among
so many Barbarous Nations, the Invasions as well of Savages as other Enemies,
Pirates, and Robbers may probably be feared; Therefore We have Given,
and for Us, Our Heirs and Successors do give Power by these Presents,
unto the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle,
William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley,
Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley,
their Heirs or Assigns by themselves, or their Captains, or their Officers
to Levy, Muster and Train up all sorts of Men, of what Condition soever,
or wheresoever Born, whether in the said Province, or elsewhere,
for the Time being; and to make War and pursue the Enemies aforesaid,
as well by Sea, as by Land; yea, even without the Limits of the said Province,
and by God's Assistance, to Vanquish and Take them, and being Taken,
to put them to Death by the Law of War, and to save them at their Pleasure;
And to do all and every other thing, which to the Charge and Office
of a Captain General of an Army belongeth, or hath accustomed to belong,
as fully and freely as any Captain General of an Army hath had the same.

Also, Our Will and Pleasure is, and by this Our Charter,
We do give and grant unto the said Edward Earl of Clarendon,
George Duke of Albemarle, William Lord Craven, John Lord Berkeley,
Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton,
and Sir William Berkeley, their Heirs and Assigns, full Power,
Liberty and Authority, in Case of Rebellion, Tumult, or Sedition
(if any should happen, which God forbid) either upon the Land within
the Province aforesaid, or upon the main Sea, in making a Voyage thither,
or returning from thence, by him and themselves, their Captains,
Deputies or Officers, to be authorized under his or their Seals,
for that purpose:  To whom also for Us, our Heirs and Successors,
We do give and grant by these Presents, full Power and Authority
to exercise Martial Law against mutinous and seditious Persons of those Parts;
such as shall refuse to submit themselves to their Government,
or shall refuse to serve in the Wars, or shall fly to the Enemy,
or forsake their Colours or Ensigns, or be Loiterers or Stragglers,
or otherwise howsoever offending against Law, Custom, or Military Discipline,
as freely, and in as ample Manner and Form as any Captain General of an Army,
by virtue of his Office, might, or hath accustomed to use the same.

And Our further Pleasure is, and by these Presents, for Us, our Heirs
and Successors, We do grant unto the said Edward Earl of Clarendon,
George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven,
John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett,
Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley, their Heirs and Assigns,
and to the Tenants and Inhabitants of the said Province, or Territory,
both present and to come, and to every of them, that the said Province,
or Territory, and the Tenants and Inhabitants thereof,
shall not from henceforth, be held or reputed any Member,
or Part of any Colony whatsoever, in America or elsewhere,
now transported or made, or hereafter to be transported or made;
nor shall be depending on, or subject to their Government in any Thing,
but be absolutely separated and divided from the same:  And our Pleasure is,
by these Presents, That they may be separated, and that they be subject
immediately to our Crown of England, as depending thereof for ever.
And that the Inhabitants of the said Province or Territory, or any of them,
shall at any Time hereafter, be compelled or compellible,
or be any ways subject, or liable to appear or answer to any Matter, Suit,
Cause, or Plaint whatsoever, out of the Province or Territory aforesaid,
in any other of our Islands, Colonies or Dominions in America, or elsewhere,
other than in our Realm of England and Dominion of Wales.

And because it may happen, That some of the People and Inhabitants
of the said Province, cannot in their private Opinions conform
to the Publick Exercise of Religion according to the Liturgy,
Forms and Ceremonies of the Church of England, or take or subscribe
the Oaths and Articles made and established in that Behalf:
And for that the same, by reason of the remote Distances of those Places,
will, as we hope, be no Breach of the Unity, and Conformity,
Established in this Nation; Our Will and Pleasure therefore is,
and We do by these Presents for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors,
Give and Grant unto the said Edward Earl of Clarendon,
George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven,
John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett,
Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley, their Heirs and Assigns,
full and free Licence, Liberty and Authority, by such Ways and Means
as they shall think fit, To Give and Grant unto such Person and Persons,
Inhabiting, and being within the said Province or Territory,
hereby or by the said recited Letters Patents, mentioned to be granted
as aforesaid, or any Part thereof, such Indulgencies and Dispensations,
in that Behalf, for, and during such Time and Times, and with such
Limitations and Restrictions, as they the said Edward Earl of Clarendon,
George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven,
John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett,
Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley, their Heirs,
or Assigns, shall in their Discretion think fit and reasonable.
And that no Person or Persons, unto whom such Liberty shall be given,
shall be any way molested, punished, disquieted, or called in question for
any Differences in Opinion or Practice, in Matters of Religious Concernment,
who do not actually disturb the civil Peace of the Province, County or Colony,
that they shall make their abode in.  But all and every such
Person and Persons, may from Time to Time, and at all Times,
freely and quietly have and enjoy his and their Judgment and Consciences,
in Matters of Religion, throughout all the said Province, or Colony,
they behaving themselves peaceably, and not using this Liberty
to Licentiousness, nor to the Civil Injury or outward Disturbance of others.
Any Law, Statute or Clause contained, or to be contained,
Usage or Customs of our Realm of England to the contrary hereof
in any wise, notwithstanding.

And in Case it shall happen, that any Doubts or Questions should arise
concerning the True Sense and Understanding of any Word, Clause, or Sentence,
contained in this Our present Charter, We Will, Ordain, and Command,
that at all Times, and in all Things, such Interpretations be made thereof,
and allow'd in all and every of Our Courts whatsoever,
as Lawfully may be Adjudged most Advantageous and Favourable
to the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle,
William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley,
Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley,
their Heirs and Assigns, although Express Mention, &c.


Witness our Self at Westminster, the Thirtieth Day of June,
in the Seventeenth Year of our Reign.

                                   Per Ipsum Regem.





                                      An
                                   ABSTRACT
                                    of the
                                 CONSTITUTION
                                      of
                                   CAROLINA.




As to the Government of Carolina, the Laws of England are there in Force;
yet the Lords-Proprietors, by their Deputies, have Power,
with the Consent of the Inhabitants, to make By-Laws for the better Government
of the said Province; so that no Law can be made, or Money rais'd,
unless the Inhabitants, or their Representatives, consent thereto:
One Law which they have in South-Carolina deserves particular Mention,
which is, their Method of chusing Juries, it being done by making
a considerable Number of Paper-Billets, on which are written
the Names of as many of the most substantial Freeholders.
These Billets are put into a Hat, out of which Twenty-four are chosen
by the next Child that appears.  Then, out of those Twenty-four,
Twelve are chosen at the next Court, after the same manner;
which is an infallible way to prevent all Manner of Fraud.

North and South-Carolina Settlements are distant from one another
some hundreds of Miles; so that Necessity compels each Colony
to keep to themselves, a Governour, Council and Assembly.
The Governor represents the Lord-Palatine; the rest of the Counsellors
are the Lord-Deputies; who, of themselves, make a Palatines Court,
and a Court of Chancery; wherein they pass several Orders of Council,
much of the Nature of the Prince's Proclamation; which continues
no longer in Force, than the next Assembly.  Likewise, they grant
several sorts of Commissions, Warrants, &c. yet Military Commissions
lie wholly in the Governor's Power; but Making of War or Peace, in all,
or the Majority of the Lords-Deputies; by whom (the Governor being one)
it is determin'd, and by whose Commissions all other Magistrates act.
On these Heads they have settled, and maintain an admirable
Constitution of Government, for the lasting Peace, Security, and Well-being
of all the Inhabitants.  The way of any ones taking up his Land in Carolina,
due to him either by Purchasing it of the Lords Proprietors here in England,
who keep their Board at Craven-House in Drury-Lane, London,
the first Thursday in every Month; or if purchas'd in Carolina,
is after this manner:  He first looks out for a Place to his Mind,
that is not already possess'd by any other; then applies himself
to the Governor and Lords Proprietors Deputies, and shews what Right he hath
to such a Tract of Land, either by Purchase of the Lords in England,
or by an Entry in the Surveyor-General's Office, in order
to purchase of the Governor and Lords Deputies there in Carolina,
who thereupon issue out their Warrant-Land as is due to him.
Who making Certificate, that he had measured out so much Land and the Bounds,
a Deed is prepared of Course, by the Secretary, which is sign'd
by the Governor and the Lords Proprietors Deputies, and the Proprietors Seal
affix'd to it, and register'd in the Secretaries Office,
which is a good Coveyance in Law of the Land therein mention'd,
to the Party and his Heirs for ever.


Thus have I given you as large and exact an Account of Carolina,
as the Discovery of so few Years (in this great and extensive Land)
would permit.  Which flourishing Country will, doubtless, in time,
increase the Number of its Productions, and afford us plentifully
those Necessaries and rich Commodities, which the Streights,
Turky and other Countries supply us withal at present,
and not seldom in their own Shipping; whereas, were those Merchandizes
the Produce of an English Plantation, and brought us home
by our own Hands and Bottoms, of what Advantage such an Improvement would be
to the Crown of Great-Britain, and the People in general,
I leave to Men of Reason and Experience to judge.  I do intend (if God permit)
by future Voyages (after my Arrival in Carolina) to pierce into
the Body of the Continent, and what Discoveries and Observations
I shall, at any time hereafter, make, will be communicated
to my Correspondents in England, to be publish'd, having furnish'd myself
with Instruments and other Necessaries for such Voyages.


For the better Understanding of this Country, I have already drawn
a very large and exact Map thereof, as far as any Discoveries
have been yet made, either by others or my self, and have spared
neither Cost nor Pains, to procure the most correct Maps and Journals thereof,
that are extant in Print, or in Manuscript.  This Map containing
nine Sheets of Imperial Paper, and now fit for engraving,
begins at Cape Henry in Virginia, 37 deg. N. Lat. and contains
all the Coasts of Carolina, or Florida, with the Bahama Islands,
great Part of the Bay of Mexico, and the Island of Cuba, to the Southward,
and several Degrees to the Westward of the Messiasippi River,
with all the Indian Nations and Villages, and their Numbers,
which of them are subject to Carolina, and trade with their People,
what Places are convenient Factories and Forts, to increase and secure
our Trade on the Messiasippi, and what Forts and Factories
the French and Spaniards have gain'd in those Latitudes,
especially on the great River and the Neighbouring Streams; all which
they illegally possess, since the very Mouth of the River Messiasippi
is in the King of England's Grant to the Lords Proprietors of Carolina,
it falling something to the Northward of 29 Degr. North Lat.
whose Claim and Right I question not, but a Peace will adjust, and restore,
which every Englishman is bound in Duty and Interest, to wish for;
if we consider how advantageously they have seated themselves,
whereby to disturb the Peace and Interest of all the English Plantations
on the Continent of America.





                                  ----------

                                    FINIS.

                                  ----------





[Original Advertisement, included for historical context.]


Lately publish'd, in the Collections for December, January, February,
and March,

The Discovery and Conquest of the Molucco and Philippine Islands;
containing their History, Ancient and Modern, Natural and Political:
Their Description, Product, Religion, Government, Laws, Languages,
Customs, Manners, Habits, Shape, and Inclinations of the Natives.
With an Account of many other adjacent Islands, and several remarkable Voyages
through the Streights of Magellan, and in other Parts.  Written in Spanish
by Bartholomew Leonardo Argensola, Chaplain to the Empress,
and Rector of Villahermosa.  Now translated into English;
and illustrated with a Map and several Cuts.


[End of Original Advertisement.]





Transcriber's Notes to etext:


This book was originally published in London in 1709.
This text follows the original spellings, which are somewhat irregular,
though still quite readable.

A footnote from William Gilmore Simms' "Life of Francis Marion" (online):

  Lawson's "Journal of a Thousand Miles' Travel among the Indians,
  from South to North Carolina", is a work equally rare and interesting.
  This unfortunate man fell a victim to his official duties.
  He was confounded, by the savages, with the government which he represented,
  and sacrificed to their fury, under the charge of depriving them,
  by his surveys, of their land.  He was made captive
  with the Baron de Graffenreid.  The latter escaped,
  but Lawson was subjected to the fire-torture.

Simms, however, was never a stickler for details.  Other accounts differ
as to John Lawson's exact fate, and no one is sure how he died.

Mike Lawson, (MIKE_LAWSON@intertec.com, http://www.mixbooks.com),
a direct descendant of the author, contacted me while I was working
on putting this book online, and sent me some interesting information,
which is summarized below.  Baron de Graffenreid = Degraffenreid, etc.

From about 1705 to 1708 John Lawson had lived in Bath Town, NC,
where his primary interests were his orchards and vines.
When he went to England to have his book published, he was "called upon
by the Lord Proprietors to assist DeGraffenreid" who was trying to settle
a colony of Palatines in North Carolina.  Franz Louis Michel,
of Bern, Switzerland, (Lawson refers to him as Francis-Louis Mitchell)
had come to America in 1702, and discovered evidence of silver
in the mountains.  He returned to Europe to start a company
to found a colony in America, and met Degraffenreid, who had similar plans,
and had already contracted with the city of Bern to remove some Anabaptists
to America -- they formed a partnership, and intended to search for silver.
After the course of events which included John Lawson's death
and a massacre of these colonists, they had a falling out,
and that plan never came off.

According to De Graffenreid, some days before the New Bern massacre
John Lawson proposed that they go up the Neuse River,
where there were plenty of wild grapes.  They were assured
"that no savages lived on that branch of the river.  But to feel safer
we took two Indians to guide, which we knew well, with two negroes to row."
Two days out, near the village of Coram, they were overtaken
by a large number of Tuscaroras, and captured.

There was a trial of sorts, where their intentions were examined,
and Mr. Lawson was charged with being too severe, and for selling their land.
After a lengthy debate, it was decided that they should be released
the next day, but the following morning, one Cor Tom reproached Mr. Lawson,
and they quarrelled.  "I made every effort to get Lawson to quit quarrelling.
I did not succeed.  All at once three or four Indians fell upon us
in a furious manner. . . .  They took our hats and periwigs and threw them
into the fire, and a council of war being held we were immediately
sentenced to death."  One of the Indians, a relation of King Taylor,
from whom De Graffenreid had bought the land for New Bern,
appealed in his behalf.  "The Indians whispered in my ear
that I had nothing to fear, but that Lawson would die, what affected me much.
They also liberated my negro, but I never saw him since. . . .
As to his death, I know nothing.  Some said he was hung,
some said he was burnt.  The Indians kept that execution very secret."

The Tuscaroras then informed De Graffenreid that they were going to war,
but would not harm Chattooka (New Bern), but that the people of New Bern
ought to stay in the town -- unfortunately, there was no way to inform
the people of New Bern.  Several days later prisoners were brought back,
and De Graffenreid tells of recognizing some of them as his tenants,
including a boy who reported that his whole family had been killed.
After six weeks imprisonment at Catechna, he was released,
and returned to New Bern, where the people were surprised to find him alive.

(The relevant passages from De Graffenreid's journal were printed
in the North Carolina Booklet, Vol. I, No. 2, June 10, 1901,
`Colonial New Bern', by Mrs. Sara Beaumont Kennedy, pp. 7-13.
Issued by the North Carolina Society of the Daughters of the Revolution.
Raleigh:  Capital Printing Company, 1901.)


Due to the age of this book, there are a number of nonstandard spellings,
and the font used in the original, with the s's much like f's,
has surely led to an error or two in the transcription, though every effort
was made to minimize this factor.  The standards of printing at the time
were also somewhat low, and combine all this with those instances
where Indian names and words are given, and some of the material
is doubtless inaccurate -- though Lawson's comments on zoology
should make that quite clear.  Nonetheless, this account remains
one of our best sources for information on the Indians of North Carolina
in and about the year 1700.


Sidenotes, throughout, are presented in squiggly brackets.  {As here.}
Where the sidenote precedes a paragraph, it is given on a separate line.


Corrections:

(p. 11)
[ and become Cripples all ther Life-time; ]
  changed to:
[ and become Cripples all their Life-time; ]

(p. 13)
[ to satisfy the Apppetite of the Rich alone. ]
  changed to:
[ to satisfy the Appetite of the Rich alone. ]

(p. 14)
[ so we got that Night to Mons. Gallian's the elder, ]
  changed to:
[ so we got that Night to Mons. Galliar's the elder, ]
  As the difference between "n" and "r" is significant,
  other evidence (William Dobein James) suggests the real name was Gaillard,
  and "Mons. Galliar's, jun'," is mentioned on the next page.

  (In giving the background of Marion, in his "Life of Gen. Francis Marion",
  Judge William Dobein James quotes from "A New Voyage to Carolina",
  and in his footnotes gives some additional commentary on the area
  in relation to Lawson's description.  This text is online.)

(p. 19)
[ which was s Parrade of all Nations, ]
  changed to:
[ which was a Parrade of all Nations, ]
    and:
[ most Natious of the known World. ]
  changed to:
[ most Nations of the known World. ]

(p. 21)
[ about it is hung Gourds Feathers, and other such like Trophies, ]
  changed to:
[ about it is hung Gourds, Feathers, and other such like Trophies, ]

(p.28)
[ for tho' this most bears a Seed in a Sort of a small Cod, ]
  changed to:
[ for tho' this Moss bears a Seed in a Sort of a small Cod, ]

(p. 44)
[ the Sinnagers, or Troquois. ]
  changed to:
[ the Sinnagers, or Iroquois. ]

(p. 47-48)
[ At that, time these Toteros Saponas, and the Keyauwees, ]
  changed to:
[ At that time these Toteros, Saponas, and the Keyauwees, ]

(p. 73)
[ on the 6th of February, 166(3/4) came to an Anchor ]
  changed to:
[ on the 6th of February, 1664, came to an Anchor ]

(p. 75)
[ to more Certainty, and greater Anvantage; whereby they might arrive ]
  changed to:
[ to more Certainty, and greater Advantage; whereby they might arrive ]

(p. 80)
[ to leave the more Northerly Platations, and sit down under ]
  changed to:
[ to leave the more Northerly Plantations, and sit down under ]

(p. 87)
[ In the Year 1707. we had the severest Winter ]
  changed to:
[ In the Year 1707, we had the severest Winter ]

(p. 91)
[ and dry it in the Sun. to keep for Use. ]
  changed to:
[ and dry it in the Sun to keep for Use. ]

(p. 111)
[ {Plum.} ]
  inserted before:
[Damson, Damazeen, and a large round black Plum are all I have met withal ]
  (This follows the paragraph on Apricots ["Apricock"],
  and the absence of this or similar side-note seems to be accidental.)

(p. 118)
[ This Beast is the greatast Enemy to the Planter, ]
  changed to:
[ This Beast is the greatest Enemy to the Planter, ]

(p. 120)
[ There Fore-Feet are open, like a Dog's; ]
  changed to:
[ Their Fore-Feet are open, like a Dog's; ]

(p. 120)
[ great Gust in September. 1700. brought ]
  changed to:
[ great Gust in September, 1700. brought ]

(p. 134)
[ and make Euquiries therein, when, at least, ]
  changed to:
[ and make Enquiries therein, when, at least, ]
  (the ol' upside-down "n" error.)

(p. 136)
  (from the list of Water Fowl)
[ Whifflers. ]
  changed to:
[ Whistlers. ]
  (in accordance with the text about them that follows.)

(p. 137)
  (from the list of Water Fowl)
[ Men. ]
  changed to:
[ Mew. ]
  (in accordance with the text about them that follows.)

(p. 151)
[ {Swaddle-Bills.} ]
  inserted before:
[ Swaddle-Bills are a sort of an ash-colour'd Duck, ]
  (This follows the paragraph on Tutcocks, precedes that on Mew,
  and the absence of this or similar side-note seems to be accidental.)

(p. 165)
[ although their be Water enough for as large Ships ]
  changed to:
[ although there be Water enough for as large Ships ]

(p. 189)
[ Their Remedies area great Cause of this Easiness ]
  changed to:
[ Their Remedies are a great Cause of this Easiness ]

(p. 194)
[ and so strung, as Beds are, and a Cubit ]
  changed to:
[ and so strung, as Beads are, and a Cubit ]

(p. 203)
[ that is common amongst them, If they are caught in theft ]
  changed to:
[ that is common amongst them.  If they are caught in theft ]

In "An Account of the Indians of North-Carolina", the side-notes
do not always perfectly match the text in the original.  In this edition,
an attempt has been made to match them to the relevent text.
The most notable changes are:

p. 204, side note {Get Fire.} has been omitted, as at the end of p. 203
there is the note {Get Fire how.} which refers to the same text,
which is only broken by the turn of a page.  The second note
appears to serve no other purpose than continuity, which is no longer needed.

p. 207, the side note {Moss Match.} actually refers to text
that begins at the end of p. 206, and in this edition the side note
has been inserted at the beginning of the relevant text.

(p. 208)
[ others (where they find a Vein of white Clay, fit for their purpose, ]
  changed to:
[ others (where they find a Vein of white Clay, fit for their purpose) ]
  (Closing parenthesis was missing.)

(pp. 212-213)
Throughout the book, a curious device is used -- at the end of each page,
on a separate line, and right-justified, appears the first word
of the next page.  This does not generally need comment,
but at the junction of pages 212 and 213, an error occurs,
in that at the bottom of page 212 the next-word-to-come is given as "being",
but the first word on page 213 is "because".  The latter is retained,
and the former omitted, as seeming best to fit the context.
It is a possibility that both should have been retained,
i.e., "being because".

(p. 214)
[ is a great Man or hath good Frieds, the Doctor is sent for. ]
  changed to:
[ is a great Man or hath good Friends, the Doctor is sent for. ]
    also:
[ keeps sucking. till he has got a great Quaatity of very ]
  changed to:
[ keeps sucking, till he has got a great Quantity of very ]

(p. 220)
[ girded him as hard for a great while) as if he had ]
  changed to:
[ girded him as hard for a great while, as if he had ]
  (No opening parenthesis.)

(p. 226)
[ Mif-kis-'su ]
  changed to:
[ Mis-kis-'su ]
  as Lawson notes the Indian languages have no "f" sound,
  and the old `s' and `f' are very similar in shape.

(p. 227)
  (In the Dictionary of Indian terms, the translations for "Minx" [Mink])
[ Min ]
  changed to:
[ Minx ]
  (in accordance with context and the preferred spelling in the text)

(p. 231)
[ settled America so easily, at they have done, ]
  changed to:
[ settled America so easily, as they have done, ]

(p. 246)
[ into any other Countries, either of our Dominins or foreign, ]
  changed to:
[ into any other Countries, either of our Dominions or foreign, ]

(p. 248)
[ such Ports only, as shall be erected and constitued by the said ]
  changed to:
[ such Ports only, as shall be erected and constituted by the said ]

(p. 253)
[ To Give and Grant unto such Person any Persons, Inhabiting, ]
  changed to:
[ To Give and Grant unto such Person and Persons, Inhabiting, ]

(p. 257)
[ to the Westward of of the Messiasippi River, ]
  changed to:
[ to the Westward of the Messiasippi River, ]


I am unable to match all of Lawson's spellings with modern versions,
especially when it comes to the names of people, places, and tribes.

However, quite likely:

Tuscarora:  Tuskeruro, and probably Turkeiruro also.
Roanoke:  Ronoack.
Neuse River:  Neus-River.
Falls-of-Neuse (north of Raleigh):  Falls of Neus-Creek.
Deep River:  Sapona-River (possible -- given as the West Branch of Cape Fair).
Cape Fear:  Cape Fair.
Haw River:  Hau River.
Congaree:  Congeree
Wateree:  Waterree
Catawba:  Kadapau (possible -- the location seems correct)
Waxhaw:  Waxsaw
Seneca:  Sinnager


"Rocky-River" is probably still "Rocky River", but there are two by that name
  in North Carolina, and the one in question is doubtless the larger one,
  situated between Haw River and Deep River.


Other non-standard spellings follow, but first some notes
on how nonstandard items were handled in the text:

  1.  It seems as if "off" is occasionally spelled "of",
      but almost always in conjunction with "far" or the like:
      i.e., "not far of", "when farthest of".  On p. 128, "when cut of"
      may also be an example.  In all these examples, though,
      "of" *could* be the correct word, if used in the sense of "from".
      If is difficult to ascertain if the difference is spelling or usage.
  2.  Where modern English would always use "than", Lawson sometimes
      uses "that".  This instance is repeated, so it is not conclusively
      an error.  One example is on p. 119, "larger that a Panther".
  3.  Abbreviated words often end with an apostrophe, rather than a period,
      which is now the standard.  "Through" is usually abbreviated as "thro'".
  4.  Italics have been kept throughout, with these notable exceptions:
      in the original, every case of "&c." was italicized;
      the side-notes were entirely italicized, except those words
      generally italicized in the text, which were rendered in normal type --
      this has been reversed.  (Where "&c." appeared in an italicized section,
      it was presented in normal type.  This too was ignored.)
  5.  Printing was not as exact an art in 1709 as it is now,
      and this should be kept in mind throughout the text.
      As spelling was also not as standardized as it is now,
      it is difficult to tell sometimes whether a word has an old spelling,
      has a typographical error, or refers to something entirely different
      from what the first impression would suggest.  In addition to this,
      there is a problem of battered type, which seems especially common
      in italic text -- which, unfortunately, is commonly used here
      for words in Indian languages, which makes reading the text
      extremely difficult at times.  And even without broken type,
      as in Lawson's dictionary entry for "A Rundlet" (perhaps a Roundlet,
      a small round object?) he gives `Ynpyupseunne' as the Woccon term,
      which remains unclear on several accounts, as `u' and `n'
      were not infrequently accidentally inverted in old texts --
      i.e., it might be `Yupyupseunne', but where can we check it?
      No exact answers can be given here, but all these factors
      should be kept in mind when attempting to read this text.
      Also in Lawson's Dictionary, occur the Indian words
      Pulawa and Mif-kis-'su -- the latter has been rendered Mis-kis-'su,
      as the old `s' and `f' were nearly identical, and were probably
      inadvertently switched -- which according to his own notes on p. 231,
      cannot happen, there being no `l' or `f' sounds in the languages.
      (In this old type, `s' has an f-like appearance in most cases,
      but a modern `s' was used if it was the last letter in a word,
      which follows a similar usage with the `s' sound in the Greek alphabet.)
      It is much harder to guess what Pulawa ought to have been.


Modern Spelling is listed first:  alternate spelling(s) follow:
(More or less in the order they appear in the text.)

  1.  When multiple spellings in text include the modern spelling,
      it is not noted.
  2.  Any word ending in -ed, such as "viewed", may end in -'d,
      as "view'd".  This gets a little complicated in such cases
      as "accompany'd" (accompanied), "try'd" (tried), "supply'd" (supplied),
      "carry'd" (carried), "hurry'd" (hurried), and the like.
      Also cases where the root word originally ended with an "e",
      such as "us'd" and "continu'd".  These cases are not always noted.


them:  'em
Mississippi:  Missisipi, Messiasippi (older concept -- seems to refer
  to a vast area, probably everything drained by that river.)
New York:  New-York
spacious:  spatious
public:  publick
style:  stile
fur:  furr
situate:  soituate
price:  prize
privilege:  priviledge
show:  shew
frontier:  fronteer
enterprise:  enterprize
scalp:  sculp
flay:  flea
allege:  alledge  (applies also to alleging, alleged, etc.)
mountainous:  mountanous
gulf:  gulph
lemon:  limon
trial:  tryal
palmetto:  palmeto
mosquitoes:  musketoes, musquetos
troublesome:  troblesome  (p. 8)
tried:  try'd
vegetable:  vegitable
buckets or boquets?: bokeets
Pennsylvania:  Pensilvania, Pensylvania
isthmus:  istmus
Glasgow:  Glasco
corpses:  corps
o'clock:  a Clock
cattle:  cattel
deer (plural):  deers
beach:  beech
clam:  clann (probable -- may be a textual error)
curlew:  curleu
pelican:  pellican
Cyprus:  Ciprus
alarm:  allarm
turkey:  turkie, turky
morbific:  morbifick
complement:  compliment (warning: compliment is also spelled this way)
specific:  specifick
most impatient (impatientest):  impatients (textual error?)
Mons. Huger:  Mons. Eugee
  (according to `Life of Gen. Francis Marion', by Judge William Dobein James,
  "Huger, who lived in the fork between South Santee and Wambaw Creek.")
splendid:  splended
continued:  continu'd
courses:  coarses
crowded:  crouded
Ashley River:  Ashley-River, Ashly-River
clothe or cloth:  cloath
tribe:  trible (textual error?)
rejoice:  rejoyce
Mons. Gendron:  Mons. L'Jandro
???:  Mons. L'Grand
Mons. Gaillard:  Mons. Galliar
affirmed:  affir'm'd
knoll:  knowl  (possible)
paddling:  padling
fabrics (fabrication, a structure):  fabricks
loam:  loom
hut:  hutt
used:  us'd
oil:  oyl
chinquapin, chinkapin, chincapin:  chinkapin, thinkapin (error?)
quiddany (a confection of quinces made with sugar):  quiddony
barbecued:  barbacu'd
loaves:  loves
creoles:  criolo's
courtesan:  curtesan
monsieur:  mounsieur
Leaguer-Ladies (soldier's wives -- Scottish term):  Leager Ladies
parade:  parrade
physic (medicine): physick
surgery:  chirurgery
expense:  expence
retaliation:  retalliation
villainy:  villany
balsamic:  balsamick
belly-ache:  belly-ach
crutches (i.e., props):  crotches
smoke:  smoak
straight:  strait (probable), streight
complete:  compleat
scraped:  scrapt
fatigue:  fatiegue (textual error?)
maize:  maiz
over-flowed:  over-flown
Stroud-water-Blue?:  Stroud-water-Blew
  [From the American Encyclopaedic Dictionary, 1896 (AED):
  stroud:  (Etym. doubtful:  perhaps from Stroud, in Gloucester, England,
  where flannel and cloth are manufactured in large quantities.)
  A kind of coarse blanket or garment of strouding (a coarse kind of cloth
  employed in trade with North American Indians) worn by the Indians
  of North America.]
medley:  medly
ragout:  ragoo
burden:  burthen (archaic)
availing (useful):  eviling    [possible, but questionable]
  [Note also that the "e" in the print is badly formed,
  and there is a slim chance it might be an "a" or another letter.]
chalybeate:  chalybid
most dismal (dismallest):  dismall'st
surprisal:  surprizal
threatening:  threatning
music:  musick
tiger:  tyger (note that in 1709 "tyger" and "panther" were generic terms)
drizzly:  drisly
acorns:  acrons (textual error?)
polecat (skunk):  polcat
arithmetic:  arithmetick
straggling:  stragling
hickory:  hiccory, hickery, hickerie
broth:  broath
loblolly
  [AED:  1.  water-gruel or spoon-meat.  2.  a sweet.]
brunette:  brounetto  (probable)
  [Probably in the older sense of a woman of brownish complexion;
  i.e., skin, eyes, and hair.]
squaw:  squah
swaddling-cloths:  swadling-clouts
rive:  reave  (possible -- not a common word)
pigged:  pig'd
  [AED:  To be huddled together with several others in a single room
  by night as well as by day; to live like pigs.]
tetter (generic term, skin disease):  tettar
colic:  cholick
gourd:  goard
saddled:  sadl'd
Brussels, Bruxelles:  Bruxels (probable)
fuller's-earth:  fullers-earth
stopped:  stopt
portion:  potion  (possible -- or textual error?)
wondering:  wondring
mechanics:  mechanicks
domestic:  domestick
passed:  past
cornuted
  [horned.  These references to horns reflect the time this book was written,
  when a man whose wife was unfaithful was said to have horns.]
stews
  [archaic:  a brothel.]
barbecues:  barbakues
fusil:  fusee, fuzee (probable)
  [a fusee can be one of several things, but the context here suggests
  that it was a fusil, which was a type of small, firelock musket.]
festination
  [haste, hurry, expedition.]
human:  humane
fuel:  fewel
ankle:  ancle
wondered:  wondred
cully
  [several senses, including a dupe or fool, especially one imposed upon
  by a prostitute.]
caddis:  cadis
Winchester-wedding
  [The AED had no entry for this, but notes that "Winchester-goose"
  is "a cant term for a venereal sore, said to have originated from
  the public stews (brothels) in Southwark, England,
  being under the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Winchester."
  It is probable that a Winchester-wedding would be of the type (or non-type)
  performed in these same institutions.]
bachelor:  batchelor
widower:  widdower
shoes:  shooes
moccasins:  moggisons, moggizons
merchandise:  merchandize
valleys:  vallies
chestnut:  chesnut
perch:  pearch
soup:  soop, soupe
Appalachian:  Appallatche
desert:  desart
Cape Fear:  Cape-Fair, Caip-Fair
befall:  befal
beaver:  bever
buffalo:  buffelo
palisades:  palisadoes
necromantic:  necromantick
Cologne, Koeln:  Cologn  (possible)
cliff or cleft?:  clift
mustaches:  mustachoes
alligator:  allegator  (despite Lawson's claim, NOT a crocodile)
turnip:  turnep
biscuit:  bisket (probable)
wholesome:  wholsome
basin:  bason
percoarson = perkoson, but I can not find any external references to either
certify:  certifie
threatened:  threatned
hindrance:  hinderance
Atlantic:  Atlantick
honeysuckle:  honysuckle, hony-suckle
molasses:  molosses
Roanoke:  Ronoack, Ronoak
shore:  shoar
moored:  mor'd
parakeet:  parrakeeto  (doubtless the Carolina Parakeet, now extinct.)
inferior:  inferiour
tie:  tye
ashore:  ashoar
peas:  pease
garlic:  garlick
chives:  cives
salad:  sallad
lettuce:  lettice
spinach:  spinage
cauliflower:  colly-flower
watermelon:  water-melon
basil:  bazil
assuaging:  asswaging
chamomile, camomile:  camomil
houseleek:  housleek
conveniences:  conveniencies
rounceval:  rouncival  (in the text, a type of pea, now called a marrowfat)
rosin:  rozin
subterranean, subterraneous:  subteraneous
gigantic:  gigantick
linen:  linnen
housewife/housewives:  houswife/houswives
housewifery:  houswifry
woolens:  woollens
choleric:  cholerick
watery:  watry
emetic:  emetick
weirs:  wares  (probable -- pp. 86, 127.  Can also be "wares", however.)
whaling:  whale-fishing
porket:  a young pig or hog.
thrived:  throve
fit:  fitt
Maryland:  Mariland
supplied:  supplyed
wig:  wigg
cutlery:  cuttlery
jasmine, jessamine:  jessamin
browse/browsing:  browze/browzing
evergreen:  ever-green
household:  houshold
virtue:  vertue
vermin:  vermine
Appamattox:  Apamaticks, Appamaticks  (probable)
cloud:  clowd
aspen:  aspin
ache:  ach
burr, bur.  (Both are still used, but "burr" is now more common,
  where John Lawson tends towards "bur".)
cathartic:  cathartick
cachexia (plural):  cachexies ("cachexy" is an English form of the word,
  now rarely, if ever, used.)
calico:  callico
hazelnut:  hazle-nut
conic/conical:  conick
exotic:  exotick
serviceberry/Juneberry/shadblow:  service (given as the name of a fruit),
  the plant it grows on is called the shadbush.  (probable)
relished?:  relisht
apricot:  apricock
gooseberry:  goosberry
vinedresser/vine dresser/vine-dresser:  vigneroon (French "vigneron")
Madeira:  Madera
rabbit:  rabbet
jackal:  jackall
havoc:  havock
holler:  hollow (Not all cases.  Of the Panther, "He hollows like a Man"
  should be "He hollers like a Man".)
sourwood tree:  sowr-wood-tree, sowr wood, sorrel
surprise:  surprize
raspberry:  rasberry
mink:  minx
mussel:  muscle (in cases such as "muscle-shell")
rheum/rheumatism:  rhume/rhumatism
rheumatic:  rhumatick
tortoise:  tortois
burrow:  borough
chipmunk:  ground squirrel (probable)
chase:  chace
insect:  reptile
reptile:  insect
  ("Insect" is used strangely, to include reptiles and amphibians.
  Conversely, Lawson uses "Reptile" to refer to insects.)
thoroughly:  throughly  (possible, p. 127)
entering:  entring
frightened:  frightned
connection:  connexion  (spelling in common use through the 19th century)
excrementitious  (spelling still technically correct, but rare enough
  that "excrescent" is suggested as an alternative, yet even that
  has the wrong connotation in modern usage.)
terrapin:  terebin
tadpole:  tad-pool
easy:  easie
wandering:  wandring
leech:  loach
Screech Owl:  Scritch Owl  (probable)
Trumpeter Swan:  Swans, called Trompeters  (probable)
fish hawk:  fishawk
smallness:  smalness
grasshopper:  grashopper
set:  sett
shot (past tense of shoot):  shotten  (see case on p. 151)
livor:  liver
waiving:  waving  (??? -- p. 163)
rye:  rie
indigo:  indico  (??? -- p. 164)
plasterers:  plaisterers
governor:  governour
joists:  joices (probably this or a related word)
hazel:  hazle
dye:  die  (p. 172)
gait:  gate   (p. 172)
inventor:  inventer  (both spellings acceptable, but "inventer" non-standard)
pare:  pair  (p. 173)
warrior:  warriour
Trap-Ball  (from Sense 8 of "Trap" in the AED)
    A game and also one of the instruments used in playing the game,
    the others being a small bat and a ball.  The trap is of wood,
    made like a slipper, with a hollow at the heel end,
    and a kind of wooden spoon working on a pivot, in which
    the ball is placed.  By striking the handle or end of the spoon
    the ball is projected up into the air, and the striker endeavors
    to hit it as far as possible with the bat before it falls to the ground.
    The opponents endeavor to catch the ball, or to bowl it
    so as to hit the trap.  Also called Trap-bat and Trap-bat and ball.
baton, bat:  batoon  (a variant spelling of baton, with a meaning
    closer to that of bat.  See Trap-Ball)
worse:  worser
wrangling:  rangling
sepulchre:  sepulcre
hominy (grits):  Rockahomine Meal (conjecture:  Lawson gives Roocauwa
  as the Woccon word for homine [hominy].), homine
nowadays:  now adays
flag (p. 189) is another word for rushes or reeds.
artificially (p. 189) has changed meaning over the years.  Means "artfully".
plaid:  plad  (in the sense of the garment, not the pattern)
porcelain:  porcelan  (used in a very old sense, referring to a cowry shell)
antic:  antick
hero:  heroe
disappointment:  disapointment
relic:  relick
tomahawk:  tamahauk
unmanned:  unman'd
frolic:  frolick
prefixed:  prefixt  (obsolete sense)
enough:  enow  (correct but obsolete)
hieroglyphic:  hieroglyphick
republic:  republick
pestle:  pestil, pestel
lightninged:  lightned  (the strict conversion to modern spelling
    would be "lightened", but "lightninged" adheres to modern usage)
lie:  lye
dripping:  dropping  (probable)
barricaded:  barricadoed
stolen:  stoln
frightened:  frightned
lingering:  lingring
mere:  meer (at least in one case -- "meer Motion" may mean something else.)
foul:  fowl  (p. 222 -- same spelling used elsewhere for "fowl".)
phthisis, phthisic:  phthisick  (may be the old sense of the term,
  designating any waste, decay, or emaciation; including tuberculosis,
  which it now designates.)
torrefy:  To dry, roast, scorch, or parch by a fire.  AED.
  This dictionary also notes that "torrefy" is a formation from the French,
  whereas "torrify" (meaning the same thing) is an English formation,
  from "torrid".
Waccon & Woccon   used interchangeably
baked:  bak't
Mongolian Hordes:  Tartarian Hurds
  (`Tartar' or `Tatar' is still in use, but in this context,
  `Mongolian Hordes' is now used almost exclusively.  What is curious
  is why Lawson has this sidenote in the first place --
  apparently he is comparing the Indians to the Tatars,
  though on what grounds is unclear.)
jailor:  jaylor
ghastly:  gastly
stuffed:  stufft
stalking:  stauking
choose:  chuse
mutinying:  mutining
sylvan:  sylvian
forewarn:  forwarn
recall:  recal
lies, lieth:  lyeth
chapel:  chappel
manor:  mannor  (possible)
ore:  oar
dignified:  dignifyed
enjoin:  enjoyn
increase:  encrease
liege:  leige (may be an error in one case)
cheerful:  chearful
let:  lett  (p. 246)  (not sure if this is the same type of `let')
twig:  twigg
brier:  bryar
wherever:  whereever (p.141 -- may be an error resulting from being broken
  at the end of a line -- i.e., where-ever.)
red clay?:  "A marl as red as blood" (p. 40)
aperitive?:  apersive (a laxative -- it fits the context.  p. 83)







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A New Voyage to Carolina, by John Lawson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A NEW VOYAGE TO CAROLINA ***

***** This file should be named 1838.txt or 1838.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/3/1838/

Produced by Alan R. Light

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
