The Project Gutenberg EBook of Days with Sir Roger De Coverley, by 
Joseph Addison and Richard Steele

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Days with Sir Roger De Coverley

Author: Joseph Addison and Richard Steele

Posting Date: January 23, 2009 [EBook #3318]
Release Date: July, 2002

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DAYS WITH SIR ROGER DE COVERLEY ***




Produced by John Hill





DAYS WITH SIR ROGER DE COVERLEY

By Joseph Addison and Richard Steele


(Originally published in THE SPECTATOR)




CONTENTS.


     SIR ROGER'S FAMILY.

     MR. WILL WIMBLE.

     THE PICTURE GALLERY.

     A COUNTRY SUNDAY.

     THE WIDOW.

     THE CHASE.

     THE COUNTY ASSIZES.

     THE SPECTATOR'S RETURN TO TOWN.




SIR ROGER'S FAMILY.

Having often received an invitation from my friend Sir Roger de Coverley
to pass away a month with him in the country, I last week accompanied
him thither, and am settled with him for some time at his country-house,
where I intend to form several of my ensuing Speculations. Sir Roger,
who is very well acquainted with my humour, lets me rise and go to bed
when I please, dine at his own table or in my chamber as I think
fit, sit still and say nothing without bidding me be merry. When
the gentlemen of the country come to see him, he only shews me at a
distance. As I have been walking in his fields I have observed them
stealing a sight of me over an hedge, and have heard the Knight desiring
them not to let me see them, for that I hated to be stared at. I am the
more at ease in Sir Roger's family, because it consists of sober and
staid persons; for as the Knight is the best master in the world, he
seldom changes his servants; and as he is beloved by all about him, his
servants never care for leaving him; by this means his domesticks are
all in years, and grown old with their master. You would take his valet
de chambre for his brother, his butler is gray-headed, his groom is one
of the gravest men that I have ever seen, and his coachman has the looks
of a privy-counsellor. You see the goodness of the master even in the
old house-dog, and in a gray pad that is kept in the stable with great
care and tenderness out of regard to his past services, tho' he has been
useless for several years.

I could not but observe with a great deal of pleasure the joy that
appeared in the countenance of these ancient domesticks upon my friend's
arrival at his country-seat. Some of them could not refrain from tears
at the sight of their old master; every one of them press'd forward to
do something for him, and seemed discouraged if they were not employed.
At the same time the good old Knight, with the mixture of the father and
the master of the family, tempered the enquiries after his own affairs
with several kind questions relating to themselves. This humanity and
good-nature engages every body to him, so that when he is pleasant upon
any of them, all his family are in good humour, and none so much as the
person whom he diverts himself with. On the contrary, if he coughs, or
betrays any infirmity of old age, it is easy for a stander-by to observe
a secret concern in the looks of all his servants.

My worthy friend has put me under the particular care of his butler, who
is a very prudent man, and, as well as the rest of his fellow-servants,
wonderfully desirous of pleasing me, because they have often heard their
master talk of me as of his particular friend.

My chief companion, when Sir Roger is diverting himself in the woods or
the fields, is a very venerable man who is ever with Sir Roger, and has
lived at his house in the nature of a chaplain above thirty years. This
gentleman is a person of good sense and some learning, of a very regular
life and obliging conversation. He heartily loves Sir Roger, and knows
that he is very much in the old Knight's esteem, so that he lives in the
family rather as a relation than a dependent.

I have observed in several of my papers, that my friend Sir Roger,
amidst all his good qualities, is something of an humorist; and that his
virtues, as well as imperfections, are as it were tinged by a certain
extravagance, which makes them particularly HIS, and distinguishes them
from those of other men. This cast of mind, as it is generally very
innocent in itself, so it renders his conversation highly agreeable, and
more delightful than the same degree of sense and virtue would appear in
their common and ordinary colours. As I was walking with him last night,
he asked me how I liked the good man whom I have just now mentioned?
and without staying for my answer told me, That he was afraid of being
insulted with Latin and Greek at his own table; for which reason he
desired a particular friend of his at the University to find him out a
clergyman rather of plain sense than much learning, of a good aspect, a
clear voice, a sociable temper, and, if possible, a man that understood
a little of backgammon. My friend, says Sir Roger, found me out this
gentleman, who, besides the endowments required of him, is, they tell
me, a good scholar, tho' he does not shew it. I have given him the
parsonage of the parish; and because I know his value, have settled upon
him a good annuity for life. If he outlives me, he shall find that he
was higher in my esteem than perhaps he thinks he is. He has now been
with me thirty years; and tho' he does not know I have taken notice of
it, has never in all that time asked anything of me for himself, tho' he
is every day soliciting me for some thing in behalf of one or other of
my tenants his parishioners. There has not been a law-suit in the
parish since he has liv'd among them. If any dispute arises they apply
themselves to him for the decision; if they do not acquiesce in his
judgment, which I think never happened above once or twice at most, they
appeal to me. At his first settling with me, I made him a present of all
the good sermons which have been printed in English, and only begg'd
of him that every Sunday he would pronounce one of them in the pulpit.
Accordingly, he has digested them into such a series, that they
follow one another naturally, and make a continued system of practical
divinity.

As Sir Roger was going on in his story, the gentleman we were talking of
came up to us; and upon the Knight's asking him who preached to tomorrow
(for it was Saturday night) told us, the Bishop of St. Asaph in the
morning, and Dr. South in the afternoon. He then shewed us his list of
preachers for the whole year, where I saw with a great deal of pleasure
Archbishop Tillotson, Bishop Saunderson, Dr. Barrow, Dr. Calamy, with
several living authors who have published discourses of practical
divinity. I no sooner saw this venerable man in the pulpit, but I very
much approved of my friend's insisting upon the qualifications of a good
aspect and a clear voice; for I was so charmed with the gracefulness of
his figure and delivery, as well as with the discourses he pronounced,
that I think I never passed any time more to my satisfaction. A sermon
repeated after this manner, is like the composition of a poet in the
mouth of a graceful actor.

I could heartily wish that more of our country-clergy would follow this
example; and instead of wasting their spirits in laborious compositions
of their own, would endeavour after a handsome elocution, and all those
other talents that are proper to enforce what has been penned by greater
masters. This would not only be more easy to themselves, but more
edifying to the people.




MR. WILL WIMBLE.

I was yesterday morning walking with Sir Roger before his house, a
country-fellow brought him a huge fish, which, he told him, Mr. William
Wimble had caught that very morning; and that he presented it, with his
service to him, and intended to come and dine with him. At the same
time he delivered a letter which my friend read to me as soon as the
messenger left him.

"Sir Roger,

"I desire you to accept of a jack, which is the best I have caught this
season. I intend to come and stay with you a week, and see how the perch
bite in the Black River. I observed with some concern, the last time I
saw you upon the bowling-green, that your whip wanted a lash to it; I
will bring half a dozen with me that I twisted last week, which I hope
will serve you all the time you are in the country. I have not been
out of the saddle for six days last past, having been at Eaton with Sir
John's eldest son. He takes to his learning hugely.

"I am, Sir, your humble servant,

"Will Wimble."

This extraordinary letter, and message that accompanied it, made me
very curious to know the character and quality of the gentleman who sent
them; which I found to be as follows. Will Wimble is younger brother to
a baronet, and descended of the ancient family of the Wimbles. He is now
between forty and fifty; but being bred to no business and born to no
estate, he generally lives with his elder brother as superintendent of
his game. He hunts a pack of dogs better than any man in the country,
and is very famous for finding out a hare. He is extremely well versed
in all the little handicrafts of an idle man: he makes a Mayfly to a
miracle; and furnishes the whole country with angle-rods. As he is a
good-natur'd officious fellow, and very much esteem'd upon account of
his family, he is a welcome guest at every house, and keeps up a
good correspondence among all the gentlemen about him. He carries a
tulip-root in his pocket from one to another, or exchanges a puppy
between a couple of friends that live perhaps in the opposite sides of
the county. Will is a particular favourite of all the young heirs, whom
he frequently obliges with a net that he has weaved, or a setting-dog
that he has made himself. He now and then presents a pair of garters of
his own knitting to their mothers or sisters; and raises a great deal of
mirth among them, by enquiring as often as he meets them how they wear!
These gentlemen-like manufactures and obliging little humours make Will
the darling of the country.

Sir Roger was proceeding in the character of him, when we saw him make
up to us with two or three hazel-twigs in his hand that he had cut in
Sir Roger's woods, as he came through them, in his way to the house.
I was very much pleased to observe on one side the hearty and sincere
welcome with which Sir Roger received him, and on the other, the secret
joy which his guest discover'd at sight of the good old Knight. After
the first salutes were over, Will desired Sir Roger to lend him one of
his servants to carry a set of shuttle-cocks he had with him in a little
box to a lady that lived about a mile off, to whom it seems he had
promised such a present for above this half year. Sir Roger's back
was no sooner turned but honest Will began to tell me of a large
cock-pheasant that he had sprung in one of the neighbouring woods,
with two or three other adventures of the same nature. Odd and uncommon
characters are the game I looked for, and most delight in; for which
reason I was as much pleased with the novelty of the person that talked
to me, as he could be for his life with the springing of a pheasant, and
therefore listen'd to him with more than ordinary attention.

In the midst of his discourse the bell rung to dinner, where the
gentleman I have been speaking of had the pleasure of seeing the huge
jack, he had caught, served up for the first dish in a most sumptuous
manner. Upon our sitting down to it he gave us a long account how he had
hooked it, played with it, foiled it, and at length drew it out upon the
bank, with several other particulars that lasted all the first course.
A dish of wild fowl that came afterwards furnished conversation for the
rest of the dinner, which concluded with a late invention of Will's for
improving the quail-pipe.

Upon withdrawing into my room after dinner, I was secretly touched with
compassion towards the honest gentleman that had dined with us; and
could not but consider, with a great deal of concern, how so good an
heart and such busy hands were wholly employed in trifles; that so much
humanity should be so little beneficial to others, and so much
industry so little advantageous to himself. The same temper of mind and
application to affairs might have recommended him to the publick esteem,
and have raised his fortune in another station of life. What good to his
country or himself might not a trader or merchant have done with such
useful tho' ordinary qualifications?

Will Wimble's is the case of many a younger brother of a great family,
who had rather see their children starve like gentlemen, than thrive in
a trade or profession that is beneath their quality. This humour fills
several parts of Europe with pride and beggary. It is the happiness of a
trading nation, like ours, that the younger sons, tho' uncapable of any
liberal art or profession, may be placed in such a way of life as may
perhaps enable them to vie with the best of their family. Accordingly,
we find several citizens that were launched into the world with narrow
fortunes, rising by an honest industry to greater estates than those of
their elder brothers. It is not improbable but Will was formerly tried
at divinity, law, or physick; and that finding his genius did not lie
that way, his parents gave him up at length to his own inventions. But
certainly, however improper he might have been for studies of a higher
nature, he was perfectly well turned for the occupations of trade
and commerce. As I think this is a point which cannot be too much
inculcated, I shall desire my reader to compare what I have here written
with what I have said in my twenty-first speculation.




THE PICTURE GALLERY.

I was this morning walking in the gallery when Sir Roger entered at the
end opposite to me, and advancing towards me, said he was glad to
meet me among his relations the De Coverleys, and hoped I liked the
conversation of so much good company, who were as silent as myself. I
knew he alluded to the pictures, and as he is a gentleman who does not a
little value himself upon his ancient descent, I expected he would give
me some account of them. We were now arrived at the upper-end of the
gallery, when the Knight faced towards one of the pictures, and as
we stood before it he entered into the matter, after his blunt way
of saying things, as they occur to his imagination, without regular
introduction, or care to preserve the appearance of chain of thought.

"It is," said he, "worth while to consider the force of dress; and how
the persons of one age differ from those of another, merely by that
only. One may observe also, that the general fashion of one age has
been followed by one particular set of people in another, and by them
preserved from one generation to another. Thus the vast jetting coat and
small bonnet, which was the habit in Harry the seventh's time, is kept
on in the yeomen of the guard; not without a good and politick view,
because they look a foot taller, and a foot and an half broader. Besides
that the cap leaves the face expanded, and consequently more terrible,
and fitter to stand at the entrances of palaces.

"This predecessor of ours, you see, is dressed after this manner, and
his cheeks would be no larger than mine, were he in a hat as I am.
He was the last man that won a prize in the tilt-yard (which is now
a common street before Whitehall). You see the broken lance that lies
there by his right foot; he shiver'd that lance of his adversary all to
pieces; and bearing himself, look you, Sir, in this manner, at the same
time he came within the target of the gentleman who rode against him,
and taking him with incredible force before him on the pommel of his
saddle, he in that manner rid the turnament over, with an air that
shewed he did it rather to perform the rule of the lists, than expose
his enemy; however, it appeared he knew how to make use of a victory,
and with a gentle trot he marched up to a gallery where their mistress
sat (for they were rivals) and let him down with laudable courtesy and
pardonable insolence. I don't know but it might be exactly where the
coffee-house is now.

"You are to know this my ancestor was not only of a military genius, but
fit also for the arts of peace, for he played on the bass-viol as
well as any gentleman at court; you see where his viol hangs by his
basket-hilt sword. The action at the tilt-yard you may be sure won the
fair lady, who was a maid of honour, and the greatest beauty of
her time; here she stands the next picture. You see, Sir, my
great-great-great-grandmother has on the new-fashion'd petticoat, except
that the modern is gather'd at the waist; my grandmother appears as if
she stood in a large drum, whereas the ladies now walk as if they
were in a go-cart. For all this lady was bred at court, she became an
excellent country-wife, she brought ten children, and when I shew you
the library, you shall see in her own hand (allowing for the
difference of the language) the best receipt now in England both for an
hasty-pudding and a white-pot.

"If you please to fall back a little, because 'tis necessary to look at
the three next pictures at one view; these are three sisters. She on
the right hand, who is so very beautiful, died a maid; the next to her,
still handsomer, had the same fate against her will; this homely thing
in the middle had both their portions added to her own, and was stolen
by a neighbouring gentleman, a man of stratagem and resolution, for
he poisoned three mastiffs to come at her, and knocked down two
deer-stealers in carrying her off. Misfortunes happen in all families:
the theft of this romp and so much money, was no great matter to our
estate. But the next heir that possessed it was this soft gentleman,
whom you see there: observe the small buttons, the little boots, the
laces, the slashes about his clothes, and above all the posture he is
drawn in (which to be sure was his own choosing); you see he sits with
one hand on a desk writing and looking as it were another way, like an
easy writer, or a sonneteer. He was one of those that had too much wit
to know how to live in the world; he was a man of no justice, but great
good manners; he ruined every body that had any thing to do with him,
but never said a rude thing in his life; the most indolent person in the
world, he would sign a deed that passed away half his estate with his
gloves on, but would not put on his hat before a lady if it were to save
his country. He is said to be the first that made love by squeezing the
hand. He left the estate with ten thousand pounds debt upon it; but,
however, by all hands I have been informed that he was every way the
finest gentleman in the world. That debt lay heavy on our house for one
generation, but it was retrieved by a gift from that honest man you see
there, a citizen of our name, but nothing at all akin to us. I know Sir
Andrew Freeport had said behind my back, that this man was descended
from one of the ten children of the maid of honour I shewed you above;
but it was never made out. We winked at the thing indeed, because money
was wanting at that time."

Here I saw my friend a little embarrassed, and turned my face to the
next portraiture.

Sir Roger went on with his account of the gallery in the following
manner. "This man (pointing to him I looked at) I take to be the honour
of our house. Sir Humphrey de Coverley; he was in his dealings as
punctual as a tradesman and as generous as a gentleman. He would have
thought himself as much undone by breaking his word, as if it were to be
followed by bankruptcy. He served his country as knight of this shire
to his dying day. He found it no easy matter to maintain an integrity
in his words and actions, even in things that regarded the offices which
were incumbent upon him, in the care of his own affairs and relations
of life, and therefore dreaded (though he had great talents) to go
into employments of state, where he must be exposed to the snares of
ambition. Innocence of life and great ability were the distinguishing
parts of his character; the latter, he had often observed, had led to
the destruction of the former, and used frequently to lament that great
and good had not the same signification. He was an excellent husbandman,
but had resolved not to exceed such a degree of wealth; all above it he
bestowed in secret bounties many years after the sum he aimed at for
his own use was attained. Yet he did not slacken his industry, but to
a decent old age spent the life and fortune which was superfluous to
himself, in the service of his friends and neighbours."

Here we were called to dinner, and Sir Roger ended the discourse of
this gentleman, by telling me, as we followed the servant, that this his
ancestor was a brave man, and narrowly escaped being killed in the
civil wars; "For," said he, "he was sent out of the field upon a private
message, the day before the battle of Worcester." The whim of narrowly
escaping by having been within a day of danger, with other matters above
mentioned, mixed with good sense, left me at a loss whether I was more
delighted with my friend's wisdom or simplicity.




A COUNTRY SUNDAY.

I am always very well pleased with a country Sunday, and think, if
keeping holy the seventh day were only a human institution, it would be
the best method that could have been thought of for the polishing and
civilizing of mankind. It is certain the country people would soon
degenerate into a kind of savages and barbarians, were there not such
frequent returns of a stated time, in which the whole village meet
together with their best faces, and in their cleanliest habits, to
converse with one another upon indifferent subjects, hear their duties
explained to them, and join together in adoration of the Supreme Being.
Sunday clears away the rust of the whole week, not only as it refreshes
in their minds the notions of religion, but as it puts both the sexes
upon appearing in their most agreeable forms, and exerting all such
qualities as are apt to give them a figure in the eye of the village.
A country-fellow distinguishes himself as much in the Church-yard, as a
citizen does upon the Change, the whole parish-politicks being generally
discussed in that place either after sermon or before the bell rings.

My friend Sir Roger, being a good churchman, has beautified the inside
of his church with several texts of his own choosing. He has likewise
given a handsome pulpit-cloth, and railed in the communion-table at his
own expense. He has often told me, that at his coming to his estate he
found his parishioners very irregular; and that in order to make them
kneel and join in their responses, he gave every one of them a hassock
and a common prayer-book: and at the same time employed an itinerant
singing-master, who goes about the country for that purpose, to instruct
them rightly in the tunes of the psalms; upon which they now very much
value themselves, and indeed outdo most of the country churches that I
have ever heard.

As Sir Roger is landlord to the whole congregation, he keeps them in
very good order, and will suffer nobody to sleep in it besides himself;
for if by chance he has been surprised into a short nap at sermon, upon
recovering out of it he stands up and looks about him, and if he sees
any body else nodding, either wakes them himself, or sends his servants
to them. Several other of the old Knight's particularities break out
upon these occasions. Sometimes he will be lengthening out a verse in
the singing-psalms, half a minute after the rest of the congregation
have done with it; sometimes, when he is pleased with the matter of his
devotion, he pronounces Amen three or four times to the same prayer; and
sometimes stands up when every body else is upon their knees, to count
the congregation, or see if any of his tenants are missing.

I was yesterday very much surprised to hear my old friend, in the midst
of the service, calling out to one John Mathews to mind what he was
about, and not disturb the congregation. This John Mathews it seems is
remarkable for being an idle fellow, and at that time was kicking his
heels for his diversion. This authority of the Knight, though exerted in
that odd manner which accompanies him in all circumstances of life, has
a very good effect upon the parish, who are not polite enough to see
anything ridiculous in his behaviour; besides that the general good
sense and worthiness of his character makes his friends observe these
little singularities as foils that rather set off than blemish his good
qualities.

As soon as the sermon is finished, no body presumes to stir till Sir
Roger is gone out of the church. The Knight walks down from his seat in
the chancel between a double row of his tenants, that stand bowing to
him on each side; and every now and then enquires how such an one's
wife, or mother, or son, or father do, whom he does not see at church;
which is understood as a secret reprimand to the person that is absent.

The chaplain has often told me, that upon a catechising day, when Sir
Roger has been pleased with a boy that answers well, he has ordered
a Bible to be given him next day for his encouragement; and sometimes
accompanies it with a flitch of bacon to his mother. Sir Roger has
likewise added five pounds a year to the clerk's place; and that he may
encourage the young fellows to make themselves perfect in the church
service, has promised upon the death of the present incumbent, who is
very old, to bestow it according to merit.

The fair understanding between Sir Roger and his chaplain, and their
mutual concurrence in doing good, is the more remarkable, because the
very next village is famous for the differences and contentions that
rise between the parson and the 'squire, who live in a perpetual state
of war. The parson is always preaching at the 'squire, and the 'squire
to be revenged on the parson never comes to church. The 'squire has made
all his tenants atheists and tithe-stealers; while the Parson instructs
them every Sunday in the dignity of his order, and insinuates to them in
almost every sermon, that he is a better man than his patron. In short,
matters are come to such an extremity, that the 'squire has not said his
prayers either in publick or private this half year; and that the parson
threatens him, if he does not mend his manners, to pray for him in the
face of the whole congregation.

Feuds of this nature, though too frequent in the country, are very fatal
to the ordinary people; who are so used to be dazzled with riches, that
they pay as much deference to the understanding of a man of an estate,
as of a man of learning; and are very hardly brought to regard any
truth, how important soever it may be, that is preached to them, when
they know there are several men of five hundred a year who do not
believe it.




THE WIDOW.

In my first description of the company in which I pass most of my time,
it may be remembered that I mentioned a great affliction which my
friend Sir Roger had met with in his youth; which was no less than a
disappointment in love. It happened this evening that we fell into a
very pleasing walk at a distance from his house. As soon as we came into
it, "It is," quoth the good old man, looking round him with a smile,
"very hard, that any part of my land should be settled upon one who has
used me so ill as the perverse widow did; and yet I am sure I could
not see a sprig of any bough of this whole walk of trees, but I should
reflect upon her and her severity. She has certainly the finest hand
of any woman in the world. You are to know this was the place wherein I
used to muse upon her; and by that custom I can never come into it,
but the same tender sentiments revive in my mind, as if I had actually
walked with that beautiful creature under these shades. I have been
fool enough to carve her name on the bark of several of these trees;
so unhappy is the condition of men in love, to attempt the removing of
their passions by the methods which serve only to imprint it deeper. She
has certainly the finest hand of any woman in the world."

Here followed a profound silence; and I was not displeased to observe
my friend falling so naturally into a discourse, which I had ever
before taken notice he industriously avoided. After a very long pause he
entered upon an account of this great circumstance in his life, with
an air which I thought raised my idea of him above what I had ever had
before; and gave me the picture of that chearful mind of his, before
it received that stroke which has ever since affected his words and
actions. But he went on as follows:

"I came to my estate in my twenty-second year, and resolved to follow
the steps of the most worthy of my ancestors who have inhabited this
spot of earth before me, in all the methods of hospitality and good
neighbourhood, for the sake of my fame; and in country sports and
recreations, for the sake of my health. In my twenty-third year I was
obliged to serve as sheriff of the county; and in my servants, officers,
and whole equipage, indulged the pleasure of a young man (who did not
think ill of his own person) in taking that public occasion of shewing
my figure and behaviour to advantage. You may easily imagine to yourself
what appearance I made, who am pretty tall, rid well, and was very well
dressed, at the head of a whole county, with musick before me, a feather
in my hat, and my horse well bitted. I can assure you I was not a little
pleased with the kind looks and glances I had from all the balconies and
windows as I rode to the hall where the assizes were held. But when I
came there, a beautiful creature in a widow's habit sat in court, to
hear the event of a cause concerning her dower. This commanding creature
(who was born for the destruction of all who behold her) put on such a
resignation in her countenance, and bore the whispers of all around the
court with such a pretty uneasiness, I warrant you, and then recovered
herself from one eye to another, till she was perfectly confused by
meeting something so wistful in all she encountered, that at last, with
a murrain to her, she cast her bewitching eye upon me. I no sooner met
it, but I bowed like a great surprised booby; and knowing her cause to
be the first which came on, I cried, like a captivated calf as I was!
'Make way for the defendant's witnesses.' This sudden partiality made
all the county see the sheriff also was become a slave to the fine
widow. During the time her cause was upon trial, she behaved herself,
I warrant you, with such a deep attention to her business, took
opportunities to have little billets handed to her counsel, then would
be in such a pretty confusion, occasioned, you must know, by acting
before so much company, that not only I but the whole court was
prejudiced in her favour; and all that the next heir to her husband had
to urge, was thought so groundless and frivolous, that when it came
to her counsel to reply, there was not half so much said as every one
besides in the court thought he could have urged to her advantage. You
must understand, Sir, this perverse woman is one of those unaccountable
creatures, that secretly rejoice in the admiration of men, but indulge
themselves in no further consequences. Hence it is that she has ever had
a train of admirers, and she removes from her slaves in town to those
in the country, according to the seasons of the year. She is a reading
lady, and far gone in the pleasures of friendship. She is always
accompanied by a confident, who is witness to her daily protestations
against our sex, and consequently a bar to her first steps towards love,
upon the strength of her own maxims and declarations.

"However, I must needs say this accomplished mistress of mine has
distinguished me above the rest, and has been known to declare Sir Roger
de Coverley was the tamest and most humane of all the brutes in the
country. I was told she said so, by one who thought he rallied me; but
upon the strength of this slender encouragement of being thought least
detestable, I made new liveries, new-pair'd my coach horses, sent them
all to town to be bitted and taught to throw their legs well, and move
all together, before I pretended to cross the country, and wait upon
her. As soon as I thought my retinue suitable to the character of
my fortune and youth, I set out from hence to make my addresses. The
particular skill of this lady has ever been to inflame your wishes, and
yet command respect. To make her mistress of this art, she has a greater
share of knowledge, wit, and good sense, than is usual even among men of
merit. Then she is beautiful beyond the race of women. If you won't
let her go on with a certain artifice with her eyes, and the skill of
beauty, she will arm herself with her real charms, and strike you with
admiration instead of desire. It is certain that if you were to behold
the whole woman, there is that dignity in her aspect, that composure in
her motion, that complacency in her manner, that if her form makes you
hope, her merit makes you fear. But then again, she is such a desperate
scholar, that no country-gentleman can approach her without being
a jest. As I was going to tell you, when I came to her house I was
admitted to her presence with great civility; at the same time she
placed herself to be first seen by me in such an attitude, as I think
you call the posture of a picture, that she discovered new charms, and
I at last came towards her with such an awe as made me speechless. This
she no sooner observed but she made her advantage of it, and began a
discourse to me concerning love and honour, as they both are followed
by pretenders and the real votaries to them. When she discussed these
points in a discourse, which I verily believe was as learned as the best
philosopher in Europe could possibly make, she asked me whether she
was so happy as to fall in with my sentiments on these important
particulars. Her confident sat by her, and upon my being in the last
confusion and silence, this malicious aid of hers turning to her says,
'I am very glad to observe Sir Roger pauses upon this subject, and seems
resolved to deliver all his sentiments upon the matter when he pleases
to speak.' They both kept their countenances, and after I had sat half
an hour meditating how to behave before such profound casuists, I rose
up and took my leave. Chance has since that time thrown me very often in
her way, and she as often has directed a discourse to me which I do not
understand. This barbarity has kept me ever at a distance from the most
beautiful object my eyes ever beheld. It is thus also she deals with all
mankind, and you must make love to her, as you would conquer the sphinx,
by posing her. But were she like other women, and that there were any
talking to her, how constant must the pleasure of that man be, who could
converse with the creature--But, after all, you may be sure her heart is
fixed on some one or other; and yet I have been credibly inform'd; but
who can believe half that is said? After she had done speaking to me,
she put her hand to her bosom and adjusted her tucker. Then she cast her
eyes a little down, upon my beholding her too earnestly. They say she
sings excellently; her voice in her ordinary speech has something in it
inexpressibly sweet. You must know I dined with her at a publick table
the day after I first saw her, and she helped me to some tansy in the
eye of all the gentlemen in the country. She has certainly the finest
hand of any woman in the world. I can assure you, Sir, were you to
behold her, you would be in the same condition; for as her speech is
musick, her form is angelick. But I find I grow irregular while I am
talking of her; but indeed it would be stupidity to be unconcerned at
such perfection. Oh the excellent creature! she is as inimitable to all
women, as she is inaccessible to all men."

I found my friend begin to rave, and insensibly led him towards the
house, that we might be joined by some other company; and am convinced
that the widow is the secret cause of all that inconsistency which
appears in some parts of my friend's discourse; tho' he has so much
command of himself as not directly to mention her, yet according to that
of Martial, which one knows not how to render into English, DUM TACET
HANC LOQUITUR. I shall end this paper with that whole epigram, which
represents with much humour my honest friend's condition.

     QUICQUID AGIT RUFUS, NIHIL EST, NISI NAEVIA RUFO,
     SI GAUDET, SI FLET, SI TACET, HANC LOQUITUR:
     CAENAT, PROPINAT, POSCET, NEGAT, ANNUIT, UNA EST
     NAEVIA; SI NON SIT NAEVIA, MUTUS ERIT.
     SCRIBERET HESTERNA PATRI CUM LUCE SALUTEM,
     NAEVIA LUX, INQUIT, NAEVIA NUMEN AVE.
     Epig. 69, 1. I.

     Let Rufus weep, rejoice, stand, sit or walk,
     Still he can nothing but of NAEVIA talk;
     Let him eat, drink, ask questions, or dispute,
     Still he must speak of NAEVIA, or be mute.
     He writ to his father, ending with this line,
     "I am, my lovely NAEVIA, ever thine."




THE CHASE.

Those who have searched into human nature, observe that nothing so much
shews the nobleness of the soul as that its felicity consists in action.
Every man has such an active principle in him, that he will find out
something to employ himself upon, in whatever place or state of life he
is posted. I have heard of a gentleman who was under close confinement
in the Bastile seven years; during which time he amused himself in
scattering a few small pins about his chamber, gathering them up again,
and placing them in different figures on the arm of a great chair. He
often told his friends afterwards, that unless he had found out this
piece of exercise, he verily believed he should have lost his senses.

After what has been said, I need not inform my readers that Sir Roger,
with whose character I hope they are at present pretty well acquainted,
had in his youth gone through the whole course of those rural diversions
which the country abounds in; and which seem to be extremely well suited
to that laborious industry a man may observe here in a far greater
degree than in towns and cities. I have before hinted at some of my
friend's exploits: he had in his youthful days taken forty coveys of
partridges in a season; and tired many a salmon with a line consisting
but of a single hair. The constant thanks and good wishes of the
neighbourhood always attended him, on account of his remarkable enmity
towards foxes; having destroyed more of those vermin in one year, than
it was thought the whole country could have produced. Indeed the Knight
does not scruple to own among his most intimate friends, that in order
to establish his reputation this way, he has secretly sent for great
numbers of them out of other counties, which he used to turn loose about
the country by night, that he might the better signalise himself in
their destruction the next day. His hunting horses were the finest
and best managed in all these parts: his tenants are still full of the
praises of a gray stone-horse that unhappily staked himself several
years since, and was buried with great solemnity in the orchard.

Sir Roger, being at present too old for fox-hunting, to keep himself in
action, has disposed of his beagles and got a pack of STOP-HOUNDS. What
these want in speed, he endeavours to make amends for by the deepness
of their mouths and the variety of their notes, which are suited in such
manner to each other, that the whole cry makes up a complete concert.
He is so nice in this particular, that a gentleman having made him a
present of a very fine hound the other day, the Knight returned it by
the servant with a great many expressions of civility; but desired him
to tell his master, that the dog he had sent was indeed a most excellent
BASS, but that at present he only wanted a COUNTER-TENOR. Could I
believe my friend had ever read Shakespeare, I should certainly conclude
he had taken the hint from Theseus in the MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM.

     My hounds are bred out of the Spartan kind,
     So flu'd so sanded, and their heads are hung
     With ears that sweep away the morning dew.
     Crook-knee'd and dew-lap'd like Thessalian bulls,
     Slow in pursuit, but match'd in mouths like bells,
     Each under each:  A cry more tuneable
     Was never holla'd to, nor chear'd with horn.

Sir Roger is so keen at this sport, that he has been out almost every
day since I came down; and upon the chaplain's offering to lend me
his easy pad, I was prevailed on yesterday morning to make one of
the company. I was extremely pleased, as we rid along, to observe the
general benevolence of all the neighbourhood towards my friend. The
farmers' sons thought themselves happy if they could open a gate for the
good old Knight as he passed by; which he generally requited with a nod
or a smile, and a kind of enquiry after their fathers and uncles.

After we had rid about a mile from home, we came upon a large heath, and
the sportsmen began to beat. 'They had done so for some time, when, as I
was at a little distance from the rest of the company, I saw a hare pop
out from a small furze-brake almost under my horse's feet. I marked the
way she took, which I endeavoured to make the company sensible of by
extending my arms; but to no purpose, till Sir Roger, who knows that
none of my extraordinary motions are insignificant, rode up to me,
and asked me if PUSS was gone that way? Upon my answering yes, he
immediately called in the dogs, and put them upon the scent. As they
were going off, I heard one of the country-fellows muttering to his
companion, that 'twas a wonder they had not lost all their sport, for
want of the silent gentleman's crying STOLE AWAY.

This, with my aversion to leaping hedges, made me withdraw to a rising
ground, from whence I could have the pleasure of the whole chase,
without the fatigue of keeping in with the hounds.

The hare immediately threw them above a mile behind her; but I was
pleased to find, that instead of running straight forwards, or, in
hunter's language, FLYING THE COUNTRY, as I was afraid she might have
done, she wheel'd about, and described a sort of circle round the hill
where I had taken my station, in such manner as gave me a very distinct
view of the sport. I could see her first pass by, and the dogs some time
afterwards unravelling the whole track she had made, and following her
thro' all her doubles. I was at the same time delighted in observing
that deference which the rest of the pack paid to each particular hound,
according to the character he had acquired amongst them: If they were
at a fault, and an old hound of reputation opened but once, he was
immediately followed by the whole cry; while a raw dog, or one who was
a noted LIAR might have yelped his heart out, without being taken notice
of.

The hare now, after having squatted two or three times, and been put up
again as often, came still nearer to the place where she was at first
started. The dogs pursued her, and these were followed by the jolly
Knight, who rode upon a white gelding, encompassed by his tenants
and servants, and chearing his hounds with all the gaiety of five and
twenty. One of the sportsmen rode up to me, and told me that he was sure
the chace was almost at an end, because the old dogs, which had hitherto
lain behind, now headed the pack. The fellow was in the right. Our hare
took a large field just under us, followed by the full cry IN VIEW. I
must confess the brightness of the weather, the chearfulness of every
thing around me, the CHIDING of the hounds, which was returned upon us
in a double echo from two neighbouring hills, with the hollowing of the
sportsmen, and the sounding of the horn, lifted my spirits into a most
lively pleasure, which I freely indulged because I was sure it was
innocent. If I was under any concern it was on the account of the
poor hare, that was now quite spent and almost within the reach of her
enemies; when the huntsman getting forward threw down his pole before
the dogs. They were now within eight yards of that game which they
had been pursuing for almost as many hours; yet on the signal
before-mentioned they all made a sudden stand, and tho' they continued
opening as much as before, durst not once attempt to pass beyond the
pole. At the same time Sir Roger rode forward, and alighting, took up
the hare in his arms; which he soon delivered up to one of his servants,
with an order, if she could be kept alive, to let her go in his great
orchard; where it seems he has several of these prisoners of war, who
live together in a very comfortable captivity. I was highly pleased to
see the discipline of the pack, and the good-nature of the Knight, who
could not find in his heart to murder a creature that had given him so
much diversion.

As we were returning home, I remembered that Monsieur Paschal, in his
most excellent discourse on the misery of man, tells us, that all our
endeavours after greatness proceed from nothing but a desire of being
surrounded by a multitude of persons and affairs that may hinder us from
looking into ourselves, which is a view we cannot bear. He afterwards
goes on to shew that our love of sports comes from the same reason,
and is particularly severe upon hunting. What, says he, unless it be
to drown thought, can make men throw away so much time and pains upon a
silly animal, which they might buy cheaper in the market? The foregoing
reflection is certainly just, when a man suffers his whole mind to be
drawn into his sports, and altogether loses himself in the woods; but
does not affect those who propose a far more laudable end for this
exercise, I mean, the preservation of health, and keeping all the organs
of the soul in a condition to execute her orders. Had that incomparable
person, whom I last quoted, been a little more indulgent to himself
in this point, the world might probably have enjoyed him much longer;
whereas thro' too great an application to his studies in his youth,
he contracted that ill habit of body, which, after a tedious sickness,
carried him off in the fortieth year of his age; and the whole history
we have of his life till that time, is but one continued account of
the behaviour of a noble soul struggling under innumerable pains and
distempers.

For my own part I intend to hunt twice a week during my stay with Sir
Roger; and shall prescribe the moderate use of this exercise to all
my country friends as the best kind of physick for mending a bad
constitution, and preserving a good one. I cannot do this better, than
in the following lines out of Mr. Dryden.

     The first physicians by debauch were made;
     Excess began, and sloth sustains the trade.
     By chace our long-liv'd fathers earn'd their food;
     Toil strung the nerves, and purify'd the blood;
     But we their sons, a pamper'd race of men,
     Are dwindled down to threescore years and ten.
     Better to hunt in fields for health unbought,
     Than fee the Doctor for a nauseous draught.
     The wise for cure on exercise depend;
     God never made his work for man to mend.




THE COUNTY ASSIZES.

A man's first care should be to avoid the reproaches of his own heart;
his next, to escape the censures of the world. If the last interferes
with the former, it ought to be entirely neglected; but otherwise there
cannot be a greater satisfaction to an honest mind, than to see those
approbations which it gives itself seconded by the applauses of the
publick: a man is more sure of his conduct, when the verdict which he
passes upon his own behaviour is thus warranted and confirmed by the
opinion of all that know him.

My worthy friend Sir Roger is one of those who is not only at peace
within himself, but beloved and esteemed by all about him. He receives
a suitable tribute for his universal benevolence to mankind, in the
returns of affection and good-will, which are paid him by every one
that lives within his neighbourhood. I lately met with two or three odd
instances of that general respect which is shewn to the good old
Knight. He would needs carry Will Wimble and myself with him to the
county-assizes. As we were upon the road, Will Wimble join'd a couple
of plain men who rid before us, and conversed with them for some time;
during which my friend Sir Roger acquainted me with their characters.

The first of them, says he, that has a spaniel by his side, is a yeoman
of about an hundred pounds a year, an honest man: he is just within the
game-act, and qualified to kill an hare or a pheasant. He knocks down a
dinner with his gun twice or thrice a week; and by that means lives much
cheaper than those who have not so good an estate as himself. He would
be a good neighbour if he did not destroy so many partridges. In short,
he is a very sensible man; shoots flying; and has been several times
foreman of the petty-jury.

The other that rides along with him is Tom Touchy, a fellow famous for
TAKING THE LAW of every body. There is not one in the town where he
lives that he has not sued at a quarter sessions. The rogue had once
the impudence to go to law with the Widow. His head is full of costs,
damages, and ejectments: He plagued a couple of honest gentlemen so long
for a trespass in breaking one of his hedges, till he was forced to sell
the ground it enclosed to defray the charges of the prosecution. His
father left him fourscore pounds a year; but he has CAST and been cast
so often, that he is not now worth thirty. I suppose he is going upon
the old business of the willow-tree.

As Sir Roger was giving me this account of Tom Touchy, Will Wimble and
his two companions stopped short till we came up to them. After having
paid their respects to Sir Roger, Will told him that Mr. Touchy and
he must appeal to him upon a dispute that arose between them. Will it
seems, had been giving his fellow-traveller an account of his angling
one day in such a hole; when Tom Touchy, instead of hearing out his
story, told him that Mr. Such-a-one, if he pleased, might take the law
of him for fishing in that part of the river. My friend Sir Roger heard
them both, upon a round trot; and after having paused some time told
them, with the air of a man who would not give his judgment rashly, that
much might be said on both sides. They were neither of them dissatisfied
with the Knight's determination, because neither of them found himself
in the wrong by it. Upon which we made the best of our way to the
assizes.

The court was sat before Sir Roger came; but notwithstanding all the
justices had taken their places upon the bench, they made room for the
old Knight at the head of them; who for his reputation in the country
took occasion to whisper in the judge's ear, that he was glad his
lordship had met with so much good weather in his circuit. I was
listening to the proceeding of the court with much attention, and
infinitely pleased with that great appearance and solemnity which so
properly accompanies such a publick administration of our laws; when,
after about an hour's sitting, I observed to my great surprise, in the
midst of a trial, that my friend Sir Roger was getting up to speak. I
was in some pain for him, till I found he had acquitted himself of two
or three sentences with a look of much business and great intrepidity.

Upon his first rising the court was hushed, and a general whisper ran
among the country people that Sir Roger was UP. The speech he made was
so little to the purpose, that I shall not trouble my readers with an
account of it; and I believe was not so much designed by the Knight
himself to inform the court, as to give him a figure in my eye, and keep
up his credit in the country.

I was highly delighted, when the court rose, to see the gentlemen of
the country gathering about my old friend, and striving who should
compliment him most; at the same time that the ordinary people gazed
upon him at a distance, not a little admiring his courage, that was not
afraid to speak to the judge.

In our return home we met with a very odd accident; which I cannot
forbear relating, because it shews how desirous all who know Sir Roger
are of giving him marks of their esteem. When we were arrived upon the
verge of his estate, we stopped at a little inn to rest ourselves and
our horses. The man of the house had it seems been formerly a servant in
the Knight's family; and to do honour to his old master, had some time
since, unknown to Sir Roger, put him up in a sign-post before the door;
so that THE KNIGHT'S HEAD had hung out upon the road about a week
before he himself knew any thing of the matter. As soon as Sir Roger was
acquainted with it, finding that his servant's indiscretion proceeded
wholly from affection and good-will, he only told him that he had made
him too high a compliment; and when the fellow seemed to think that
could hardly be, added with a more decisive look, that it was too great
an honour for any man under a duke; but told him at the same time, that
it might be altered with a very few touches, and that he himself would
be at the charge of it. Accordingly, they got a painter by the Knight's
directions to add a pair of whiskers to the face, and by a little
aggravation of the features to change it into the SARACEN'S HEAD.
I should not have known this story had not the inn-keeper, upon Sir
Roger's alighting, told him in my hearing, that his honour's head was
brought back last night with the alterations that he had ordered to be
made in it. Upon this my friend, with his usual chearfulness, related
the particulars above-mentioned, and ordered the head to be brought into
the room. I could not forbear discovering greater expressions of mirth
than ordinary upon the appearance of this monstrous face, under which,
notwithstanding it was made to frown and stare in a most extraordinary
manner, I could still discover a distant resemblance of my old friend.
Sir Roger, upon seeing me laugh, desired me to tell him truly if I
thought it possible for people to know him in that disguise. I at first
kept my usual silence; but upon the Knight's conjuring me to tell him
whether it was not still more like himself than a Saracen, I composed my
countenance in the best manner I could, and replied, that much might be
said on both sides.

These several adventures, with the Knight's behaviour in them, gave me
as pleasant a day as ever I met with in any of my travels.




THE SPECTATOR'S RETURN TO TOWN.

Having notified to my good friend Sir Roger that I should set out for
London the next day, his horses were ready at the appointed hour in the
evening; and attended by one of his grooms, I arrived at the country
town at twilight, in order to be ready for the stage-coach the day
following. As soon as we arrived at the inn, the servant, who waited
upon me, enquired of the chamberlain in my hearing what company he
had for the coach? The fellow answered, Mrs. Betty Arable, the great
fortune, and the widow her mother; a recruiting officer (who took a
place because they were to go); young Squire Quickset her cousin
(that her mother wished her to be married to); Ephraim the Quaker, her
guardian; and a gentleman that had studied himself dumb, from Sir Roger
de Coverley's. I observed by what he said of myself, that according to
his office he dealt much in intelligence; and doubted not but there was
some foundation for his reports for the rest of the company, as well as
for the whimsical account he gave of me. The next morning at day-break
we were all called; and I, who knew my own natural shyness, and
endeavour to be as little liable to be disputed with as possible,
dressed immediately, that I might make no one wait. The first
preparation for our setting-out was, that the captain's half-pike was
placed near the coachman, and a drum behind the coach. In the mean time
the drummer, the captain's equipage, was very loud, that none of the
captain's things should be placed so as to be spoiled; upon which his
cloke-bag was fixed in the seat of the coach: and the captain himself,
according to a frequent, tho' invidious behaviour of military men,
ordered his man to look sharp, that none but one of the ladies should
have the place he had taken fronting to the coach-box.

We were in some little time fixed in our seats, and sat with that
dislike which people not too good-natured usually conceive of each
other at first sight. The coach jumbled us insensibly into some sort of
familiarity; and we had not moved above two miles, when the widow asked
the captain what success he had in his recruiting? The officer, with a
frankness he believed very graceful, told her, "That indeed he had but
very little luck, and had suffered much by desertion, therefore should
be glad to end his warfare in the service of her or her fair daughter.
In a word," continued he, "I am a soldier, and to be plain is my
character: you see me, Madam, young, sound, and impudent; take me
yourself, widow, or give me to her, I will be wholly at your disposal.
I am a soldier of fortune, ha!" This was followed by a vain laugh of his
own, and a deep silence of all the rest of the company. I had nothing
left for it but to fall fast asleep, which I did with all speed. "Come,"
said he, "resolve upon it, we will make a wedding at the next town.
We will wake this pleasant companion who has fallen asleep, to be the
brideman" (and giving the quaker a clap on the knee) he concluded "This
sly saint, who I'll warrant, understands what's what as well as you or
I, widow, shall give the bride as father." The quaker, who happened to
be a man of smartness, answered, "Friend, I take it in good part that
thou hast given me the authority of a father over this comely and
virtuous child; and I must assure thee, that if I have the giving her,
I shall not bestow her on thee. Thy mirth, friend, savoureth of folly:
Thou art a person of a light mind; thy drum is a type of thee, it
soundeth because it is empty. Verily, it is not from thy fulness, but
thy emptiness that thou hast spoken this day. Friend, friend, we have
hired this coach in partnership with thee, to carry us to the great
city; we cannot go any other way. This worthy mother must hear thee if
thou wilt needs utter thy follies; we cannot help it, friend, I say: if
thou wilt, we must hear thee; but if thou wert a man of understanding,
thou wouldst not take advantage of thy courageous countenance to abash
us children of peace. Thou art, thou sayest, a soldier; give quarter
to us, who cannot resist thee. Why didst thou fleer at our friend, who
feigned himself asleep? He said nothing; but how dost thou know what
he containeth? If thou speakest improper things in the hearing of this
virtuous young virgin, consider it as an outrage against a distressed
person that cannot get from thee: 'To speak indiscreetly what we are
obliged to hear, by being hasped up with thee in this publick vehicle,
is in some degree assaulting on the high road."

Here Ephraim paused, and the captain with a happy and uncommon impudence
(which can be convicted and support itself at the same time) cries,
"Faith, friend, I thank thee; I should have been a little impertinent
if thou hadst not reprimanded me. Come, thou art, I see, a smoky old
fellow, and I'll be very orderly the ensuing part of my journey. I was
going to give myself airs, but, ladies, I beg pardon."

The captain was so little out of humour, and our company was so far
from being soured by this little ruffle, that Ephraim and he took a
particular delight in being agreeable to each other for the future; and
assumed their different provinces in the conduct of the company. Our
reckonings, apartments, and accommodation, fell under Ephraim; and the
captain looked to all disputes upon the road, as the good behaviour of
our coachman, and the right we had of taking place as going to London
of all vehicles coming from thence. The occurrences we met with were
ordinary, and very little happened which could entertain by the relation
of them: but when I consider'd the company we were in, I took it for
no small good-fortune that the whole journey was not spent in
impertinences, which to the one part of us might be an entertainment, to
the other a suffering. What therefore Ephraim said when we were almost
arriv'd at London had to me an air not only of good understanding but
good breeding. Upon the young lady's expressing her satisfaction in
the journey, and declaring how delightful it had been to her, Ephraim
delivered himself as follows: "There is no ordinary part of human life
which expresseth so much a good mind, and a right inward man, as his
behaviour upon meeting with strangers, especially such as may seem the
most unsuitable companions to him: such a man, when he falleth in the
way with persons of simplicity and innocence, however knowing he may be
in the ways of men, will not vaunt himself thereof; but will the rather
hide his superiority to them, that he may not be painful unto them. My
good friend (continued he, turning to the officer), thee and I are to
part by and by, and peradventure we may never meet again: but be advised
by a plain man: modes and apparel are but trifles to the real man,
therefore do not think such a man as thyself terrible for thy garb,
nor such a one as me contemptible for mine. When two such as thee and
I meet, with affections as we ought to have towards each other, thou
shouldst rejoice to see my peaceable demeanour, and I should be glad to
see thy strength and ability to protect me in it."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Days with Sir Roger De Coverley, by 
Joseph Addison and Richard Steele

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DAYS WITH SIR ROGER DE COVERLEY ***

***** This file should be named 3318.txt or 3318.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/1/3318/

Produced by John Hill

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
