The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Pleasures of a Single Life, or, The
Miseries Of Matrimony, by Anonymous


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: The Pleasures of a Single Life, or, The Miseries Of Matrimony

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: October 19, 2004  [eBook #13800]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PLEASURES OF A SINGLE LIFE,
OR, THE MISERIES OF MATRIMONY***


E-text prepared by David Starner, Charles Bidwell, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team



THE PLEASURES OF A SINGLE LIFE

Or, The Miseries of Matrimony

Occasionally Writ Upon the many DIVORCES lately Granted by Parliament.

WITH THE CHOICE,
OR, THE _Pleasures of a Country_-LIFE.

_Dedicated to the_ Beaus _against the next Vacation._

_London_: Printed and Sold by _H. Hills_, in _Black-fryars_,
near the Water-side. 1709.    _Price One Penny._







Wedlock, oh! Curs'd uncomfortable State,
Cause of my Woes, and Object of my hate.
How bless'd was I? Ah, once how happy me?
When I from those uneasie Bonds were free;
How calm my Joys? How peaceful was my Breast,
Till with thy fatal Cares too soon opprest,
The World seem'd Paradice, so bless'd the Soil
Wherein I liv'd, that Business was no Toil;
Life was a Comfort, which produc'd each day
New Joys, that still preserv'd me from decay,
Thus Heav'n first launch'd me into pacifick Seas,
Where free from Storms I mov'd with gentle Breeze;
My Sails proportion'd, and my Vessell tite,            }
Coasting in Pleasures-Bay I steer'd aright,            }
Pallac'd with true Content, and fraighted with delight }

Books my Companions were wherein I found
Needful Advice, without a noisy Sound,
But was with friendly pleasing silence taught,
Wisdom's best Rules, to fructify my Thought,
Rais'd up our Sage Fore-fathers from the dead, }
And when I pleas'd, invok'd them to my Aid,    }
Who at my Study-Bar without a Fee would plead: }
Whilst I Chief Justice sat, heard all their Sutes,
And gave my Judgment on their learn'd Disputes;
Strove to determine ev'ry Cause aright,
And for my Pains found Profit and Delight,
Free from Partiality; I fear'd no blame,
Desir'd no Brib'ry, and deserv'd no Shame,
But like an upright Judge, grudg'd no Expence
Of time, to fathom Truth with Diligence,
Reading by Day, Contemplating by Night,
Till Conscience told me that I judg'd aright,
Then to my Paper-World I'd have recourse,
And by my Maps run o'er the Universe;
Sail round the Globe, and touch at every Port,
Survey those Shoars where Men untam'd resort,
View the old Regions where the _Persian_ Lord
Taught Wooden Deities first to be Ador'd,
Ensnar'd at last to Sacrifice his Life
To the base Pride of an Adult'rous Wife,
And where the _Grecian_ Youth to Arms inur'd.  }
The hungry Soil with _Persian_ Blood manur'd,  }
Where bold _Busephilus_ brutal Conduct show'd, }
The force of monstrous Elephants withstood,
And with his Rider waded through a purple Flood.

Then would I next the _Roman_ Field survey,
Where brave _Fabricius_ with his Army lay;
Fam'd for his Valour, from Corruption free,
Made up of Courage and Humility.
That when Encamp'd the good Man lowly bent,
Cook'd his own Cabbage in his homely Tent:
And when the _Samaites_ sent a Golden Sum,
To tempt him to betray his Country _Rome_,
The Dross he scoffingly return'd untold,                      }
And answer'd with a Look serenely bold,                       }
That _Roman_ Sprouts would boil without their _Grecian_ Gold: }
Then eat his Cale-worts for his Meal design'd,
And beat the _Grecian_ Army when he'd din'd.

Thus wou'd I range the World from Pole to Pole;
To encrease my Knowledge, and delight my Soul;
Travel all Nations and inform my Sence;
With ease and safety, at a small Expence:
No Storms to plough, no Passengers Sums to pay,
No Horse to hire, or Guide to show the way,
No _Alps_ to clime, no Desarts here to pass,
No Ambuscades, no Thief to give me chase;
No Bear to dread, or rav'nous Wolf to fight,
No Flies to sting, no Rattle-Snakes to bite;
No Floods to ford, no Hurricans to fear;
No dreadful Thunder to surprize the Ear;
No Winds to freeze, no Sun to scorch or fry,
No Thirst, or Hunger, and Relief not nigh.
All these Fatiegues and Mischiefs could I shun;   }
Rest when I pleas'd, and when I please Jog on,    }
And travel through both _Indies_ in an Afternoon. }

When the Day thus far pleasingly was spent,
And every Hour admin'stred Content,
Then would I range the Fields, and flow'ry Meads,
Where Nature her exub'rant Bounty spreads,
In whose delightful Products does appear
Inimitable Beauty ev'ry where;
Contemplate on each Plant, and useful Weed,
And how its Form first lay involved in Seed,
How they're preserv'd by Providential Care,
For what design'd, and what their Virtues are.
Thus to my Mind by dint of Reason prove,
That all below is ow'd to Heaven above,
And that no Earthly Temporals can be,
But what must Center in Eternity.
Then gaze aloft, whence all things had their Birth,
And mount my prying Soul 'twixt Heaven and Earth,
Thus the sweet Harmonv o' th' whole admire,  }
And by due Search new Learning still aquire, }
So nearer ev'ry day to Truths Divine aspire. }

When tir'd with thought, then from my Pocket pluck
Some friendly dear Companion of a Book,
Whose homely Calves-skin fences did contain
The Verbal Treasure of some Old good Man:
Made by long study and experience wise,
Whose piercing thoughts to Heavenly knowledge rise,
Amongst whose Pious Reliques I would find,
Rules for my Life, Rich Banquets for my mind,
Such pleasing Nectar, such Eternal Food,
That well digested, makes a Man a God;
And for his use at the same time prepares
On Earth a Heav'n in spight of worldly Cares,
The day in these Enjoyments would I spend,
But chuse at Night my Bottle and my Friend,
Took prudent care that neither were abus'd,
But with due Moderation both I us'd.
And in one sober Pint found more delight,
Then the insatiate Sot that swills all Night;
Ne'er drown my Senses, or my Soul debase.
Or drink beyond the relish of my blass
For in Excess good Heav'ns design is Crost,
In all Extreams the true Enjoyments lost,
Wine chears the Heart, and elevates the Soul,
But if we surfeit with too large a Bowl,
Wanting true Aim we th' happy Mark o'er Shoot,
And change the Heavenly Image to a Brute.
So the great _Grecian_ who the World subdu'd,
And drown'd whole Nations in a Sea of Blood;
At last was Conquer'd by the Power of Wine,
And dy'd a Drunken Victime to the Vine.
My Friend, and I, when o'er our Bottle sat,
Mix'd with each Glass some inoffensive Chat,
Talk'd of the World's Affairs, but still kept free
From Passion, Zeal, or Partiality;
With honest freedom did our thoughts dispense,
And judg'd of all things with indifference;
Till time at last did our Delights invade,
And in due season separation made,
Then without Envy, Discord or Deceit,
Part like true Friends as loving as we meet.
The Tavern change to a domestick scene,
That sweet Retirement, tho it's ne'er so mean.
Thus leave each other in a Cheerful Plight,
T' enjoy the silent Pleasures of the Night,
When home return'd, my Thanks to Heaven pay,
For all the past kind Blessing of the Day;
No haughty Help-mate to my Peace molest,
No treacherous Snake to harbour in my Breast:
No fawning Mistress of the Female Art,
With _Judas_ Kisses to betray my Heart;
No light-tail'd Hypocrite to raise my Fears,
No vile Impert'nence to torment my Ears;
No molted Off spring to disturb my Thought,
In Wedlock born but G----d knows where begot;
No lustful _Massalina_ to require
Whole Troops of Men to feed her Brutal Fire?
No Family Cares my quiet to disturb;
No Head-strong Humours to asswage or Curb
No Jaring Servants, no Domestick strife,       }
No Jilt, no Termagent, no Faithless Wife,      }
With Vinegar or Gall, to sowre or bitter Life. }

Thus freed from all that could my Mind annoy,
Alone my self, I did my self enjoy:
When Nature call'd, I laid me down to rest,
With a sound Body, and a peaceful Breast;
Hours of Repose with Constancy I kept,
And Guardian Angels watch'd me as I slept,
In lively Dreams reviving as I lay,
The Pleasures of the last precedent day,
Thus whilst I singly liv'd, did I possess           }
By Day and Night incessant Happiness,               }
Content enjoy'd awak'd, and sleeping found no less. }

But the Curs'd Fiend from Hell's dire Regions sent,
Ranging the World to Man's Destruction bent,
Who with an Envious Pride beholding me,
Advanc'd by Virtue to Felicity,
Resolv'd his own Eternal wretched state,
Should be in part reveng'd by my sad Fate;
And to at once my happy Life betray
Flung Woman, Fathless Woman in my way:
Beauty she had, a seeming Modest Mein,             }
All Charms without, but Devil all within,          }
Which did not yet appear, but lurk'd, alas unseen. }
A fair Complexion far exceeding Paint,
Black sleepy Eyes that would have Charm'd a Saint;
Her Lips so soft and sweet, that ev'ry Kiss,
Seem'd a short Tast of the Eternal Bliss;
Her set of Teeth so Regular and White,
They'd show their Lustre in the darkest Night;
Round her Seraphick Face so fair and young,
Her Sable Hair in careless Dresses hung,
Which added to her beauteous Features, show'd
Like some fair Angel peeping through a Cloud?
Her Breasts, her Hands, and every Charm so bright,
She seem'd a Sun by Day, a Moon by Night;
Her shape so ravishing, that every Part,
Proportion'd was to the nicest Rules of Art:
So awful was her Carriage when she mov'd,
None could behold her, but he fear'd and lov'd,
She danc'd well, sung well, finely plaid the Lute,
Was always witty in her Words, or Mute;
Obliging, not reserv'd, nor yet too free,
But as a Maid divinely bless'd should be;
Not vainly gay, but decent in Attire,               }
She seem'd so good, she could no more acquire       }
Of Heaven, than what she had, & Man no more desire: }
Fortune, like God and Nature too was kind,
And to these Gifts a copious Sum had joyn'd
Who could the power of such Temptations shun;
What frozen _Synick_ from her Charms could run:
What Cloister'd Monk could see a Face so bright, }
But quit his Beads and follow Beauty's Light,    }
And by Its Lustre hope to shun Eternal Night.    }
I so bewitch'd, and poyson'd with her Charms,
Believ'd the utmost Heaven was in her Arms,
Methoughts the Goodness, in her Eyes I see,
Spoke her the Off-spring of some Deity.
Now Books and Walks, would no content afford,
She was the only Good to be Ador'd.
In her fair Looks alone delight I found,
Love's raging Storms all other Joys had drown'd.
By Beauty's _Ignis fatuus_ led astray,
Bound for Content, I lost my happy way
Of Reason's faithful Pilot now bereft,
Was amongst Rocks and Shelves in danger left,
There must have perish'd, as I fondly thought,
Lest her kind Usage my Salvation wrought;
Her happy Aid I labour'd to obtain,
Hop'd for Success, yet fear'd her sad Disdain,
Tortur'd like dying Convicts whilst they live,
'Twixt fear of Death, and hopes of a Reprieve.
First for her smallest Favours did I sue,
Crept, Fawn'd and Cring'd, as Lovers us'd to do?
Sigh'd e'er I spoke, and when I spoke look'd Pale,
In words confus'd disclos'd my mournful Tale?
Unpractised and Amour's fine Speeches coin'd,
But could not utter what I well design'd.
Warm'd by her Charms 'gainst Bashfulness I strove,
And trembling far, and stammer'd out my Love;
Told her how greatly I admir'd and fear'd,
Which she 'twixt Coyness and Compassion heard,
Grutch'd no Expence of Money, or of Time,
And thought that not to adore her was a Crime;
The more each Visit I acquainted grew,
Yet every time found something in her new.
Who was above her Sex so fortunate,
She had a Charm for Man in every State;
Beauty for the Youthful, Prudence for the Old,
Scripture for the Godly, for the Miser Gold;
Wit for the Ingenious, silence for the Grave,
Flatt'ry for the Fool, and Cunning for the Knave:
Compounded thus of such Varieties,                    }
She had a knack to every Temper please,               }
And as her self thought fit was every one of these.   }
I lov'd, I sigh'd and vow'd, talk'd, whin'd, and pray'd,
And at her Feet my panting Heart I lay'd;
She smil'd, then frown'd, was now reserv'd, then free,
And as she plaid her part, oft chang'd her Key;
Not through Fantastick Humour but Design,
To try me throughly e'er she should be mine,
Because she wanted in one Man to have,
A Husband, Lover, Cuckold and a Slave.
So Travellers, before a Horse they buy,
His Speed, his Paces, and his Temper try,
Whether he'll answer Whip and Spur, thence Judge,
If the poor Beast will prove a patient Drudge:
When she by wiles had heightned my Desire,
And fain'd Love's sparkles to a raging Fire;
Made now for Wedlock, or for _Bedlam_ fit.
Thus Passion gain'd the upper-hand of Wit,
The Dame by pity, or by Interest mov'd,
Or else by Lust, pretended now she lov'd;
After long-sufferings, her Consent I got.             }
To make me happy, as I hop'd and thought,             }
But oh, the wretched hour I ty'd the _Gordian_ Knot.  }

Thus thro' mistake I rashly plung'd my Life
Into that Gulph of Miseries a Wife.
With joyful Arms I thus embrac'd my Fare,
Believ'd too soon, was undeceiv'd too late;
So hair-brain'd Fools to _Indian_ Climates rove,
With a vain hope their Fortunes to improve;
There spend their slender Cargoes, then become
Worse Slaves abroad than e'er they were at home
When a few Weeks were wasted I compar'd,
With all due moderation and regard,
My former freedom, with my new restraint,
Judging which State afforded most content.
But found a single Life as calm and gay,
As the delightful Month of blooming _May_,
Not chill'd with Cold, or scorch'd with too much heat.  }
Not plagu'd with flying Dust, nor drown'd with wet,     }
But pleasing to the Eyes, and to the Nostrils sweet.    }

But Wedlock's like the blustring Month of _March_,
That does the Body's Maims and Bruises search,
Brings by cold nipping Storms unwelcom Pains,
And finds, or breeds, Distempers in our Veins;
Renews old Sores, and hastens on Decay,
And seldom does afford one pleasant Day.
But Clouds dissolve, or raging Tempest blow,
And untile Houses, like the wrangling Shrow;
Thus _March_ and Marriage justly may be said,            }
To be alike, then sure the Man is Mad,                   }
That loves such changling Weather where the best is bad. }

Though I once happy in a single Life,
Yet Shipwrack'd all upon that Rock a Wife.
By Gold and Beauties Powerful Charms betray'd,
To the dull drugery of a Marriage-Bed;
That Paradise for Fools, a Sport for Boys,
Tiresom its Chains, and brutal are its Joys,
Thou nauseous Priestcraft that to soon appear'd,
Not as I hop'd, but worse than what I fear'd.
All her soft Charms which I believ'd divine,
Marriage I thought had made them only mine;
Vain hope, alas for I too early found,
My Brows were with the Throne of Wedlock crown'd,
Jealousies, first from Reason rais'd a doubt,
And Fatal Chance th' unhappy Truth brought out;
Made it so plain from all Pretences free'd.
That wicked Woman no Excuse could plead;
And if she wants device to hide her Shame,
Hell can no Umbrage for Audult'ry frame.

I though it prudence the Disgrace to hide,
Tho' rav'd and Storm'd, she Pardon beg'd and Cry'd.
Yet with false Protestations strove to Charm:
The Cuckold to believe she'd done no harm,
Tho' taken by surprize (O curse the Day)
Where all the Marks of past Enjoyment lay,
And she disorder'd by her lustful freeks
Had Shame and Horrour strugling in her Cheeks:
Yet, made Essays to clear her Innocence,
And hide her guilt with Lyes and Impudence;
For lustful Women like a vicious State,
Oft stifle Ills by others full as great,
But I convinc'd too plainly of her Guilt,
All her false Oaths and quick inventions spoilt,
Which when she'd used in vain she blush'd and cry'd,
And own'd her fault she found she could not hide.

This I forgave, she promis'd to reclaim,
Vow'd future truth if I'd conceal the shame;
But what Strange Adamantine Chain can bind,
Woman corrupted to be just or kind:
Or how can Man to an adultress shew
That Love, which to a faithful Wife is due.
I strugled hard, and all my Passions chekt,
And chang'd Revenge into a mild Respect,
That Good for Ill return'd might touch hear near,
And Gratitude might bind her more tan fear;
My former Love I every day renew'd;
And all the Signals of Oblivion shew'd;
Wink'd at small Faults, wou'd no such Trifles mind,
As accidental Failings not designed.
I all things to her Temper easie made,
Scorn'd to reflect, and hated to upbraid;
She chose (and rich it was) her own Attire,
Nay, had what a proud Woman could desire.

Thus the new Covenant I strictly kept,
And oft in private for her Failings wept,
Yet bore with seeming Cheerfulness those Cares,
That bring a Man too soon to grisled Hairs.

But all this kindness I dispens'd in vain.
Where Lust and base Ingratitude remain.
Lust, which if once in Female fancy fix'd,
Burns like Salt Petre, with driy Touchwood mix'd:
And tho' cold Fear for time may stop its force,      }
Twill soon like Fire confin'd, break out the worse,  }
Or like a Tide obstucted, re-assume its course.      }

No Art cou'd e'e presume the stinking _Stote_,
Or change the lecherous Nature of the _Goat_.
No skilful Whitster ever found the flight,
To wash or bleach an _Ethiopian_ White.
No gentle Usage truly will Asswage,
A Tyger's fierceness, or a Lyon's rage,
Stripes and severe Correction is the way,
Whence once they're thro'ly Conquer'd, they'll obey,
'Tis Whip and Spur, Commanding Reign and Bit,
That makes the unruly head-strong Horse submit,
So stubborn faithless Woman must be us'd,
Or Man by Woman basely be abus'd.

For after all the Endearments I should show,
At last she turn'd both Libertine and Shrow,
From my Submission grew perverse and proud,
Crabbed as Varges, and as Thunder loud;
Did what she pleas'd, would no Obedience own,
And redicul'd the Patience I had shown.
Fear'd no sharp threatnings, valued no disgrace,
But flung the wrongs she'd done me in my Face;
Grew still more head strong, turbulent and Lewd,
Filling my Mansion with a spurious brood.
Thus Brutal Lust her humane Reason drown'd,
And her loose Tail obliged the Country round;
Advice, Reproof, Pray'rs, Tears, were flung away,
For still she grew mord wicked ev'ry day;
Till By her equals scorn'd, my Servants fed,
The Brutal Rage of her adultrous bed.
Nay, in my absence trucled to my Groom,
And hug'd the servile Traytor in my Room;
When these strange Tydings, Thunder struck my Ear,
And such Inhumane Wrongs were made appear,
On these just Grounds for a Divorce I su'd,             }
At last that head-strong Tyrant wife subdu'd,           }
Cancel'd the marriage-bonds, and basterdiz'd her brood. }

_Woman_, thou worst of all Church-plagues, farewel;
Bad at the best, but at the worst a Hell;
Thou truss of wormwood, bitter Teaz of Life,
Thou Nursery of humane cares a wife.
Thou Apple-Eating Trayt'riss who began
The Wrath of Heav'n, and Miseries of Man,
And hast with never-failing diligence,
Improv'd the Curse to humane Race e'er since.
Farewel Church-juggle that enslav'd my Life,
But bless that Pow'r that rid me of my Wife.
And now the Laws once more have set me free,
If Woman can again prevail with me,
My Flesh and Bones shall make my Wedding-Feast,       }
And none shall be Invited as my Guest,                }
T' attend my _Bride_, but th' _Devil_ and a _Priest_. }

_FINIS._




THE CHOICE,
OR,
THE Pleasures of a _Country_--LIFE, &c.


If Heav'n the grateful Liberty wou'd give,
That I might chuse my Method how to live
And all those Hours propitious Fate shou'd lend,
In blisful Ease and Satisfaction spend.

Near some fair Town I'd have a private Seat,
Built Uniform, not little, nor to great:
Better if on a rising Ground it stood,
Fields on this side, on that a Neighb'ring Wood.
It shou'd within no other things contain,
But what are Useful, Necessary Plain:
Methinks 'tis Nauseous, and I'd ne'er endure
The needless pomp of gawdy Furniture:
A little Garden, gratefule to the Eye,
And a cool Rilvulet run Murmuring by:
On whose delicious Banks a stately Row,
Of shady Limes, or Sicamores, shou'd grow.
At th' end of which a silent Study plac'd,
Shou'd with the Noblest Authors there be grac'd.
_Horace_ and _Virgil_, in whose mighty Lines,
Immortal Wit, and solid Learning Shines.

Sharp _Juvenal_, and am'rous _Ovid_ too,
Who all the turns of Loves soft passion knew:
He, that with Judgment reads his Charming Lines,
In which strong Art, with stronger Nature joyns,
Must grant, his Fancy does the best excell:
His Thoughts so tender, and exprest so well;
With all those Moderns, Men of steady Sense,
Esteem'd for Learning, and for Eloquence:
In some of these, as Fancy shou'd advise,
I'd always take my Morning Exercise.
For sure, no Minutes bring us more Content,
Than those in pleasing useful Studies Spent.

I'd have a clear and competent Estate,
That I might live Genteely, but not Great.
As much as I cou'd moderately spend,
A little more somtimes t'oblige a Friend.
Nor shou'd the Sons of Poverty Repine
Too much at Fortune, they shou'd taste of mine,
And all that Objects of true Pity were,
Shou'd be reliev'd with what my Wants cou'd spare;
For what our Maker has too largely giv'n,
Shou'd be return'd in gratitude to Heav'n.
A frugal Plenty shou'd my Table spread,
With healthful, not luxurious Dishes fed:
Enough to satisfy, and something more
To feed the Stranger, and th' Neighb'ring Poor.
Strong Meat indulges Vice, and pampering Food
Creates Diseases, and inflames the Blood.
But what's sufficient to make Nature Strong,
And the bright Lamp of Life continue long,
I'd freely take, and as I did possess.
The bounteous Author of my Plenty bless.

I'd have a little Cellar, Cool and Neat,
With Humming Ale, and Virgin Wine Repleat.
Wine whets the Wit, improves its Native Force,
And gives a pleasant Flavour to Discourse,
By making all our Spirits Deboniar,
Throws of the Lees, the Sedement of Care.
But as the greatest Blessing Heaven lends
May be debauch'd, and serve ignoble Ends;
So, but too oft, the Grapes refreshing Juice,
Does many mischievous Effects produce,
My House, shou'd no such rude Disorders know,
As from high Drinking consequently flow,
Nor wou'd I use what was so kindly giv'n,
To the Dishonour of Indulgent Heav'n.
If any Neighbour came he shou'd be free,  }
Us'd with Respect, and not uneasy be,     }
In my Retreat, or to himself or me.       }
What Freedom, Prudence, and Right Reason give,
All Men may with impunity receive;
But the least swerving from their Rules too much,
For what's forbiden us, 'tis Death to touch.
That Life might be more comfortable yet,
And all my Joys refin'd, sincere and great,
I'd chuse too Friends, whose Company wou'd be
A great Advance to my Felicity.
Well born, of Humours suited to my own
Discreet and Men as well as Books have known.
Brave, Gen'rous, Witty, and exactly free
From loose Behaviour, or Formality.
Airy and Prudent, Merry, but not Light,
Quick in discerning, and in Judging, Right;
Secret they shou'd, be faithful to their Trust,
In Reasoning Cool, Strong, Temperate and just.
Obliging, Open, without Huffing, Brave;
Brisk in gay talking, and in sober Grave.
Close in dispute, but not tenacious, try'd
By solid Reason, and let that decide;
Not prone to Lust, Revenge, or envious Hate;
Nor busy Medlers with Intrigues of State.
Strangers to Slander, and sworn Foes to spight,
Not Quarrelsom, but Stout enough to Fight:
Loyal and Pious, Friends to _Caesar_ true
As dying Martyrs to their Maker too.
In their Society I cou'd not miss,
A permanent, sincere, substaintial Bliss.

Wou'd bounteous Heaven once more indulge, I'd chuse,
(For, who wou'd so much satisfaction lose,
As Witty Nymphs in Conversation give)
Near some obliging modest-fair to live;
For there's that sweetness in a female Mind,
Which in a Man's we cannot find;
That by a secret, but a pow'rful Art,         }
Winds up the Spring of Life, and do's impart  }
Fresh Vital Heat to the transported Heart,    }
I'd have her Reason, and her Passions sway,
Easy in Company, in private Gay.
Coy to a Fop, to the deserving free,
Still Constant to her self, and Just to me.
A soul she shou'd have for great Actions fit,
Prudence, and Wisdom to direct her Wit.
Courage to look bold danger in the Face,
No Fear, but only to be Proud, or Base:
Quick to advise by an Emergence prest,
To give good Counsel, or to take the best.
I'd have th' Expression of her Thoughts be such,
She might not seem Reserv'd, nor talk too much;
That shows a want of Judgment, and of Sense;
More than enough is but Impertinence.
Her Conduct Regular, her Mirth refind,
Civil to Strangers, to her Neighbours kind.
Averse to Vanity, Revenge and Pride;
In all the Methods of Deceit untry'd:
So faithful to her Friend, and good to all,
No Censure might upon her Actions fall
Then wou'd even Envy be compell'd to say,
She goes the least of Woman kind astray.

To this fair Creature I'd sometimes retire,
Her Conversation wou'd new Joys inspire.
Give Life and Edge so keen, no surly Care  }
Wou'd venture to assault my Soul, or dare  }
Near my Retreat to hide one secret Snare.  }
But so Divine, so Noble a Repast.
I'd seldom, and with Moderation caste.
For highest Cordials all their Virtue lose,
By a too freequent, and to bold an use;
And what would cheer the Spirits in distress;
Ruins our Health when taken to Excess.

I'd be concern'd in no litigious Jarr,
Belov'd by, all not vainly popular:
Whate'er Assistance I had power to bring
T'oblige my Country, or to serve my King,
Whene'er they call'd, I'd readily afford,
My Tongue, My Pen, my Counsel, or my Sword.
Law-suit I'd shun with as much Studious Care;
As I wou'd Dens where hungry Lyons are;
An rather put up injuries than be
A Plague to him, who'd be a plague to me.
I value Quiet at a Price too great,
To give for my Revenge so dear a Rate:
For what do we by all our bustle gain,
But counterfeit Delight for real Pain.

If Heav'n a date of many years wou'd give,
Thus I'd in Pleasure, Ease and Plenty live.
And as I near approach'd the Verge of Life,
Some kind Relation (for I'd have no Wife)
Should take upon him all my Worldly Care,
While I did for a better State prepare.
Then I'd not be with any trouble vext.
Nor have the Evening of my Days perplext.
But by a silent, and a peaceful Death,
Without a Sigh, Resign my Aged Breath:
And when committed to the Dust, I'd have
Few Tears, but Friendly drop'd into my Grave.
Then wou'd my Exit so propitious be,
All Men wou'd wish to live and dye like me.


_FINIS._




AN ANSWER TO
THE
PLEASURES
OF A
SINGLE LIFE:
OR,
THE COMFORTS
OF
MARRIAGE
Confirm'd and Vindicated:
With the Misery of Lying alone, prov'd and asserted.


_LONDON_,
Printed for _M. Goodwin_, near _Fleet Street_, 1701.




AN
ANSWER
To the Pleasure of a Single LIFE, &c.


When from Dark nothing Heaven the World did make
And all was Glorious it did undertake;
Then were in _Eden's_ Garden freely plac'd,
Each thing that's pleasant to the Sight and Tast;
'Twas fill'd with Beasts and Birds, Trees hung with Fruite
That might with Man's Cealestal Humour suite.
The World being made, both spacious and compleat,
Then Man was form'd most Nobly and Great;
When Heaven survey'd the Works that it had done,
Saw Male and Female, but found Man alone,
A baren Sex, and Insignificant,             }
Then God made Woman to supply the want,     }
And to make perfect which before was scant. }
The Word no sooner spoke, but it was done;
'Cause 'twas not fit for Man to be alone;
It was not in his power without a Wife,
To reap the happy Fruites of human Life;
Nay, more than this, Mankind long since had ceas'd,
And now had been surviv'd by senceless Beast,
He'd Slept and Wasted in obscurity,
And Darkly perish'd in his Infancy.
If Heaven, had not sent so blest a Creature,
To be the Treasure house of human Nature;
So the alwise Creator thought it best,
That Man and Wife together might be blest:
Appointed then immortal Bonds to tye,
Two Hearts in one, with equal Amity;
And so he than by his alwise Direction,
Both Souls united with the like affection;
So very sweetly and with such delight,
The swiftest Winged Minutes take their flight,
And thus Gods Love to Mankind did dispence,
The sacred Wedlock, which did then commence:
Not founded as some Criticks say, by chance;
But Heaven it self, did this blest State advance.
Not subject to the various Revolutions,
Of fickle fading human Institutions.
A Married Life was first contriv'd above,
To be an Emblem of Eternal Love;
And after by Divine indulgence sent,
To be the Crown of Man, and Wife's content;
Yet black Mouthed Envy Strives with all its might;
To blast the Credit of that sacred Rite.
The hard Mouth fops, a single Life applau'd,
And hates a Woman, that woun't be a Baw'd:
Nothing he values like a single Life,
For tho he loves a Whore, he hates a Wife,
Calls the poor Husband, Monkey, Ass or Dog,
And Laughs because he wears the Wedlock Clogg,
Yet freely they'l or'e tops of Houses Strolling,
And venture Bones each Night a Caterwouling
Expose himself to Falls, or Guns or Traps,    }
And twenty other unforeseen Mishaps,          }
All in his hot persuite of Whores and Claps.  }

Thus single Sots, who Wedlock vainly slight,
Are Slaves to Lust both Morning, Noon and Night
Ruin their Health, their Honour and Estate,
And buy Repentance at a curssed rate:
While lawful Weded Couples spend their times,
In happy charming Pleasures without Crimes,
What greater Bliss, or Comfort in this Life,
Can Man desire, but with a vertuous Wife:
I'le with a Wife in lawful Wedlock sport,
While you in Woods with Beastes of Prey resort:
Your bawdy Books, your silent Consort be,
While happy Man and Wife in Love agree,
And both unite in mutual Harmonie.
_Sodom_ for Sins like thine, by Fire was burn'd,
And from a City to a Lake was turn'd;
They Wedlock scornd, and Lust they made a Feast,
And far out did the senceless Savage Beast,
Even so, the shamless loathsom single Elff,
Worse than the Beast makes _Sodom_ of himself;
And then to lessen those his hateful Crimes,
He Rails at Wedlock in confused Rhimes,
Calls Woman Faithless, 'cause she woun't consent,
To humour what his Brutish Thoughts invent;
No wonder then, if with his poisonous Breath,
He strives to Blacken the Brightest thing on Earth:
Woman! by Heaven her very Name's a charm,
And will my Verse against all Criticks Arm;
She Comforts Man in all his Sweats and Toils,
And richly pays his Pains, with Love and Smiles.
'Tis Woman makes the ravish'd Poet write;
'Tis lovly Woman makes the Souldier Fight:
Should that soft Sex refuse the World to bless,
'Twould soon be turn'd into a Wilderness.

A cursed Crow'd without all civil Rules,
A Herd of Drinking, Cheating, Fighting Fools;
Confusion, Madness would or'e spread the Stage,
And Man would be Destroy'd in one short Age;
Here Man must own, tho scarce without a Blush,
They rather do excel than Equal us;
As useful and more nimble are their Powers,
Their Judgments sharp, and sooner ripe than ours:
Yet foul Mouth'd Scribler, makes a publick Scorn,
On whom our great Redeemer he was Born;
But Sir! the Bays, they are so much their due;
They'l wear, inspite of impudence and you;
You are so hateful cruel and unjust,
To Load that Sex, with ugly brand of Lust:
_Those whome deserved Slights and losses vex,
Invent new Sins, and throw 'em on that Sex;
Whose thrifty wickedness the Sex forsakes,
He on these beauteous Fields a_ Sodom _makes:
He ne're assaults but where the Walls are slight,
True Bullies will with none but Cowards fight.
A vertuous Woman values fame too high,           }
To let such Beastly Slaves her Walls come nigh,  }
And that's the cause, he's now her Enemy:        }
When the White flag you see by them hung out.
You then are wonderous daring bold and stout,
When once you but discover those within,
By their faint fire, have a low magazine.
A slender stock of Chastity in store,          }
Your Oathes and Curses then like Cannon roar   }
You Devil like; cry out a Whore, a Whore;      }
But if a vertuous Wife you tempt in vain,
Who doth resist you with deserv'd disdain:
And forc'd to leave her with dispair and shame,     }
Your Poisonous Tongue at least will blast her Fame, }
If her you can't; you'l ruin her good Name.         }

Is this the single Life you boast so much,
Are these the Charmes, that does your Fancy tutch,
Are these the Blessings which you have enjoy'd,
Are these the arts your lustful thoughts imploy'd;
'Tis plain your roving fancy is far worse,
Than that Blest state which you esteem a Curse;
You make it so by your insatiate mind,
Unbounded lust can never be confin'd.
It is a Riddle which I can't unfould
That any Man, can such base notions hold,
Disgrace all order, Marriage Bed defy
And gives Mankind and God himself the lye,
It is a shame, that any Man of Sense,
Should have so damn'd a_ stock _of Impudence;
Controul his Maker; and with his Laws dispence.
Blasphemeous wretch, the scorn of human race,
The very spawn of what is vile and base:
Who with your cursed pen, you're not afraid
To cross the end for which Mankind was made;
Alas! what could poor helpless Man have done
If he had been to live on Earth alone,_
He'd been the worst of all God's vast Creation,
And sunk below the sence of procreation:
He'd muddl'd out his Days in private fear,
And when in sorrow none with him to share:
The Birds and Beasts each other chose his Mate,
And are above the stint of single Fate;
The whole Creation, hate's a single Life,
And shall not Man enjoy a loving Wife?
Sure this Wife Hater, lately came from Hell
To teach poor single Mortals to rebel,
Against the sacred Laws of God and Man
From whence the state of Wedlock first began,
To make our Minds diviner charmes to suite,
Which makes the differance 'twixt a Man and Bruite;
But this blasphemous Scribler tramples down,
These antient Fences; of such great renown,
And Lanshes forth among the Shelves and Rocks
And plead's for plagues of single Life and Pox:
He Courts in Print, all others to be Lewd,
Condemns a Wife and swears he will be rude:
He talks of Roving from each Pole, to Pole,
And with fresh lustful pleasures drown his Soul:
He calls that ease, which Christians counts a Sin,
And walks the Road which Thives and Rogues go in:
He plainly tells how he does spend his time
His lazey progress, shewes what is his Crime
His baudy Books, with Calves skin fenced round,
A proof enough, wherein his faults abound.
He talks of moderation or'e a Glass            }
But mentions none of that when with his Lass,  }
He's Knave in Grain; a Blockhead and an Ass.   }
Because a Cuckold's Life was his hard fate,
Must Wedlock be abused at this rate?
Because he had a strumpit for his Wife,
He now commends a mopish single Life.
Let him content himself to live a Drone,
In some dark Corner of the World alone;
And trouble not his Brains with our blest State,
Which now is far above his wretched fate;
He talks of prayers a little while before,
And then he curss'd his Wife and call'd her whore.
Oh! meddley of confusion, never worse,
Must pray, then swear, give thanks to God and curse.
The Wife he lost, has faults as black as Hell. }
He sets her off, with a most dismal smell,     }
But not one silible of his own he'l tell.      }

He owns his Cuckoldom, and which is worse;
How then the Cuckold su'd out his Divorce:
No doubts, the Wife, that he has Abdicated,
(Had he been good,) her ills had been abated:
But Women when provok'd, without a Cause,
They like enraged subjects, breaks the Lawes:
His Whip and Spur, was too unkindly us'd;
The weaker Vessel must not be abus'd.
If he too strictly held her by the reins,
He must accept the Cuckold for his pains.

Farewel, thou scandal of a married Life,
Thou single Fop, grand Hater of a Wife;
Thou Plague to Churches, and to Women too,
'Tis time for either, to have done with you:
No more attempt, Heavens Laws for to confute,
No more advise Mankind, to be a Bruite;
_But spend they Days in some dark, lonesome Cave,
And to thy bruitish Lust be still a Slave._
Go sneak in some vile Corner of the Earth,
With Pox and Plagues, resign thy poisonous Breath,
And may the worst of Torturs be thy Death.


_FINIS._




THE Ladies Choice:
A POEM.


LONDON

Printed, and Sold by _J. How_, and _B. Bragg_, at the _Blew-Ball_
in _Avemary-Lane_, next _Ludgate-Street_, 1702.




THE LADIES CHOICE.


    _Melissa Belinda._

  Melissa.

Prithee, _Belinda_ (for thou know'st I'm Young,
Unskill'd in Arts that to our Sex belong)
Thy wiser Counsels to my Youth impart;
Teach me at once to _Love_, and _Guard_ my Heart;
That I have _Wit_, can _Sing_ and _Dance_ you know,
And the Men tell me I am Pretty too;
I now have Fifteen pleasing Summers seen,
And have been Courted by twice Fifteen Men;
Still fresh Pretenders do my Peace Invade,
They _Write_, they _Visit, Sigh_ and _Serenade_,
And try allways to Catch a Harmless Maid.

Then since our Virgin Thoughts are apt to Rove,
And few escape that Noble Passion _Love_,
Teach me, _Belinda_, by thy Arts to Chuse
What Suiters to Admit, and which Refuse._

  _Belinda._

_Melissa_, I am glad you're so Discreet,     }
For, that to more Experience you'll submit,  }
Argues your want of _Vanity_, not _Wit_.     }

And yet, my Dear, 'tis difficult t' Advise,       }
_Fools_ are so Plenty, and so Scarce the _Wise_:  }
To judge of Men, we shou'd not Trust our Eyes;    }
Outward Appearance may Delude the Sight;
Nor is it good to gaze too near the Light:
For tho' your _Beauty_, like a Painted Scene,
May Dang'rous prove to the Vile Race of Men,
Who at the greater distance do Admire,
And shun the heat of Love's Important Fire.
Whose _Little God_, like lesser Thieves, unseen,   }
Steals to our Hearts, we scarce know how or when,  }
His _Standard_ hoists and Guards the Fort Within;  }
Then like a Tyrant does our Peace Controul,
And absolutely Lords it o'er the Soul:
Thus, with your _Heart_, your _Fortune_ he'll Dispose:
He does the _Man_, you but the _Husband_ chuse.
And tho' a _Fool_, you must the _Wretch_ receive;
For where we _Love_, we soon our Persons give.

Therefore, _Melissa_, wisely Guard your Heart;
What _Nature_ won't defend, defend by _Art_:

Shun, I advise you, most Devoutly shun,
Those _Servile Apes_ that swarm about the Town;
_Pert, Noisie Coxcombs, Self-admiring Beaux_,
Known by their _want_ of _Wit_, and _Gawdy Cloaths_:

Of all the Creatures Nature does provide,
To stock the World from _Ignorance_ to _Pride_;
Of all that from her various Bosom spring,
A _Beau_ I think the oddest kind of thing;
A selfish Compound, singular, and Vain,
Half _Ass_, half _Puppet_, and the least of _Man_;
One that seems just for Nature's Pastime made,
A _Gawdy_ Carcass, with an _Empty Head_;
Whose only _Knowledge_ lies in _modish Dress_,
And seldom looks much further than his Glass.
A Creature only Govern'd by his Will;
And never _Reads_ above a _Taylors Bill_;
A Wretch extreamly _Whimsical_ and _Proud_,
Stiff in _Opinion, Talkative_ and _Loud_;
And that which most Compleatly Arms the _Fool_,
Is, That the _Fop's_ Emphatically dull.
That such, _Melissa_, may Address, 'tis true,
Write a soft _Song_, or senseless _Billetdoux_,
But 'tis _Themselves_ they _Admire_ in't, not _You_:
And she that's basely Yok'd with one of these,
Must e'en be Wedded to his _Vanities_;
Doat on a _Thing_ that scarce deserves a Name,
While he with _Slights_ rewards her Vertuous Flame:
For tell me, can he less _Indifferent_ prove,
Who thinks no Woman can Deserve his Love?
No, no, _Melissa_, never think he can;
For if you do, you're Cozen'd in your Man.

Self-Affectation sways his little Sense;
Nought but _Himself_ he Loves, and _Ignorance_.
By fatal Chance, if such a Man you Wed,
Better, _Melissa_, thou had'st Dy'd a Maid:
Ev'n such a Lover, were a Plague too great;
From such a Husband, Guard me, Oh my Fate!

Shun too, my Dear, the _Lewder Wits_ o' th' Town,
As watchfully as they'd avoid a Dun.
For such a Man too soon wou'd let you see,
_Lewdness_ and _Marriage_ do but ill Agree.
Oft at the Theatre such Sparks I've seen,               }
With _Rakish Looks, half Drunk_, come Reeling in;       }
Tossing their _Wigs_, their _Backs_ against the Scene.  }
Regardless of the Play (a Mark of Wit)
Bow to some Lewd Companion in the Pit.
Take Snuff, fling round, in the Side-Box be seen,
Whisper a Mask, and then Retire again,
To some Lov'd _Tavern_, where's their chief Delight,  }
There in Debaucheries they spend the Night,           }
Then Stagger homeward by the Morning Light.           }

Thus the Extravagant squanders his Estate,
Scarce e'er Consid'ring till it be too late:
And then a _Wife_ must Cure the dang'rous Sore,
A _Fortune_ too, his _Acres_ must Restore;
The Woman Found, is by Addresses won;
They're _married_: He's _profuse_, and she's _undone_.
The Wound once heal'd, he soon forgets the Pain,
And takes the Trade of _Lewdness_ up again:
In Vicious Days and Nights his Life is spent;
The _Pleasure_ his, but her's the _Punishment_;
For now the Heav'n she Dreamt of, proves her Hell,
Whose only _Fault_ was Loving him too well.
Pensive all Day she sits; all Night alone;
She does her slighted Love, but more his Loss bemoan.
By kind Endearments Fraught with Innocence,
She strives to soften his Impenitence;
Fain wou'd she turn him from the winding Maze,
Win him to Love, and be the same he was;
But Vain her Sighs; her Prayers, her Tears are Vain,  }
She might as soon her _Freedom_ re-obtain,            }
As think to Mollifie th' obdurate Man.                }
Who like her Person, slights the fond Advice,  }
And when with Love she wou'd his Soul Entice,  }
Flies from her Arms, and Revels in his Vice;   }
Till she, alas, foreseeing what must come,
Consents, and with the little left he packs her home.

Of such I give thee Caution to beware,                   }
Fly 'em, _Melissa_, like a Tim'rous Hare,                }
That Strains along the Vales t'avoid the Hunters Snare.  }

And from a Soldier too, thy flight direct;
In his Rough Arms, what can a Maid expect;
Long Absent days, and tedious Widow'd Nights:
Are those the Marriage Joys, the vasts Delights
We promise to our selves, with him we Love?
Or shall we else such Constant Creatures prove,
To leave our Country, and turn Fugitive:
Follow the Camp, and with the Wanderer Live.
'Mongst War-like sounds our softer hours to pass,
Scorch in the Sun, and Sleep upon the Grass:
No, no, _Melissa_, 'tis an Auxious Life;
Honour's his Mistress; let it be his Wife.

No Man of Bus'ness let thy Heart approve;
Bus'ness is oft an Enemy to Love:
Nor think, my Dear, thou canst be truly blest
With one that's _Wedded_ to his Interest.
Worldly Affairs does his Affections cloy,
_As that which shou'd preserve it, does destroy._
'Twixt two Extreams you wretchedly must Live,
Or bad, or worse, as his Affairs do Thrive;
Whose good or ill Success, must be the Rule,
One makes him Insolent, and t'other Dull.

Let no Aspiring Courtier be thy Choice;
Avoid in Courts, the Bustle and the Noise;
Where Vain _Ambition_ hurries on the Mind,
And always leaves more solid Joys behind:
As when the _Thrifty Clown_, securely Blest,
His _Barns_ with _Plenty_, with _Content_ his _Brest_,
Possest with hopes of a long lost Estate,
In haste forsakes his humble harmless Seat.
With Bagg and Bundle, Trots it up to Town,    }
There wildly Gapes, and wanders up and down,  }
And's kept in _Ignorance_ till he's undone.   }
Some weighty Sums receiv'd for _Corn_ and _Cheese_,
Are _Spent_ in _Treats_, and _Giv'n_ away in _Fees_.
Mean while the _Lawyer_ so well Acts his Part,  }
With empty Pockets, and an Aking Heart,         }
He sends him home again to Plow and Cart.       }

So the _Gay Youth_ does Lavish his Estate,
And bribes into the Favour of the _Great_;
Prefer'd he sits like Fortunes Darling Son,
To's Friends, and what he was, a Stranger grown;
Till soon some turn of a Revolving State,
Leaves him to Curse _Ambition_, and his Fate;
Threaten'd with Want, perhaps the Youngster Writes,
And Lives (or rather Starves Genteely) by his Wits.

Therefore, _Melissa_, Guard thee from surprize;
Let none of these betray thee, if thou'rt Wise;
Let not their Songs, nor Sighs, thy Soul Entice.
But if thou wou'dst be happy in thy Choice,
Above 'em all, a Gentleman prefer;
One free from Bus'ness, undisturb'd with Care;
Yet in the Publick Good (without Vile ends)
To serve his Country, and his Countries Friends:
Travel his Understanding shou'd improve;
For as it helps his Knowledge, 'twould his Love.
As to his Person, 'tis not to advise;
All Women see not with the self-same Eyes.
In that you might your own Opinion use,
Your Heart wou'd teach you; but were I to chuse,
He shou'd not be Effeminate or Proud,
(I hate the Man that is by Pride subdu'd).
In us I Grant a little Pride may be,
Much less a Crime (and may with Sense agree)
A Gift alone for our own Sex design'd,
To awe the loose Opinions of Mankind;
Who quickly else more Insolent wou'd grow:
'Tis Vertue's Guard, and Aids our Beauties too.

A Gay Appearance shou'd not make me err;
I wou'd the Beauties of the Mind prefer.
Among the Few, I'd have a Man of Sense,
Endu'd with Modesty and Temperance;
Not with a great, and yet a good Estate;
Not too much Learning, nor Illiterate,
And yet he shou'd (avoiding each extream)
Know more of Man, than Man shou'd know of him.
Be Gen'rous and Well-bred, but not Profuse;
Not giv'n to Flattery, nor to take th' Abuse:
Gentile his Carriage, and his Humour such,
Shou'd speak him Sociable, but no Debauch.
A Lover of his Country, and a Friend to Wit
Read _Poetry_ he shou'd, but shou'd not write;
His Temper Lively, not to _Wildness_ bent,
His Talk Diverting, and yet Innocent;
Not Unreserv'd, nor yet too Nicely Wise,
Apter to Bear, than Offer Injuries;
Courage enough his Honour to defend,
But Constant in his Love, and Faithful to his Friend.

This is the Man I'd to my Heart prefer;                }
Such Men, _Melissa_, well deserve our Care;            }
You'll say they're Scarce, and I must grant they are.  }
Yet I resolve by such a Man, or none,
(Unless by Love betray'd) I will be won.

But were I Woo'd by the _Embellish'd Youth_;
His Soul susceptible of Love and Truth:
By easie steps he shou'd attain my Heart,
By all the Proofs of Breeding, Wit, and Art.
Then like some Town, by _War-like Numbers_ sought,
That long against its Enemies has fought,
And oft with Courage brav'd the _shining Field_,  }
Yet in the end by Want or Force compell'd,        }
It does with Honour to the _Conqueror_ Yield.     }

So to my Lover I'd my Heart resign,
The Conquest his, the Glory should be mine.
With mutual Love my Nuptials shou'd be Blest,  }
Then to my Arms I'd call the Welcome Guest,    }
And Celebrate with Joy great _Hymen_'s Feast.  }

Marriage is Bondage, but where _Cupid_ Reigns,
The Yoke is easie; Glorious are the Chains:
His Fetters please, nor wish we to be Free,
But Glory in the Loss of Liberty:
And yet but half our Thanks we owe the Boy,
He gives us Love, 'tis _Hymen_ gives us Joy;
Well might the Poets feign those Gods a-kin,
For we are only Happy where they join.
As when _Aurora_ does the Bridal Morn,
With an uncommon Gayety Adorn
From its Illustrious Pride with ease we may
Foretel the Brightness of the coming Day:
So when true Love the Sacred Tye precedes,
Secure of Happiness that Couple weds;
No Threat'ning Storms do e'er Molest their Joy,
Nor Anxious Quarrels do their Peace destroy;
Their days slide on in the securest ease,
And Circle in Eternal Rounds of Bliss.

Blest in my Wish thus far, my next should be,
(For I _Melissa_, wou'd live far and free
From the vile Tumults of this viler Town)
To have some little Cottage of my own;
No _Spacious_, but a _Pleasant_ Country Seat,
Where the Gay Spring shou'd smile on our Retreat;
Delightful Gardens shou'd the Structure Bound,
All _Love_ within, and _Innocence_ around;
Adorn'd with Fruit-Trees curious to the Eye,
With streaming Fountains, and a River nigh;
Where, low-grown Willows do recline their head,
And o'er its fall their Meeting Branches spread,
As tho' they were by careful Nature hung,  }
To listen and regard its Murm'ring Song,   }
Whose Silver current as it glides along;   }
Does wash the Bank of some Delightful Grove,
Fragrant beneath, and shaded all above;
Where the fresh Seasons breathe their vital Air,
And pretty Birds with untaught Songs repair;
Where spreading Pines, and taller Poplars grow,
Young Elms that do a pleasing Prospect show.
Where Bow'rs of Yew, and twisted Hazles stand,
With cluster'd Filberts to invite the hand;
A Place by Nature fram'd to feast the Mind,
By Art for Solitude and Love design'd;
Where we wou'd walk, and waste our idler hours,
Gather the luscious Fruits and various Flowers,
Crop from their stalks the Columbine and Rose,      }
And from its Branch, the juicy Peach unlose,        }
And ev'ry Sweet of Nature should it self disclose.  }

So the first Pair, of Innocence possest,
Were in their Native _EDEN_ truly Blest;
At large they rang'd o'er all the flow'ry Land,
And pluck'd their Food from Nature's lib'ral Hand:
Tripp'd o'er the Soil, and to the Fountains ran.
The Happy Woman _She_, and _He_ the Happy Man.

Next in my Family I'd employ my Care,
My Attendance few, but honest and sincere;
I wou'd not have our happier Delights,
Destroy'd by Gaming Days, or Drinking Nights.
Nor yet look shye upon those Friends he brought,
I wou'd seem Pleasant, tho' I lik'd them not:
Courteous to all, and Lib'ral to the Poor,
They still shou'd chant their Blessings at my Door;
From whence dissatisfy'd they shou'd not go,
Lest Heaven shou'd retrench its Bounty too;
No Jars among my Servants shou'd be found,
But Chains of lasting Peace shou'd still run round.

Thus we'd the Innocence of Life enjoy,
For Love's a Beauty which does seldom cloy.
As Peaceful Monarchs do their Kingdoms Sway,
He shou'd my Heart, and I'd in Love obey,
No change of Fortune shou'd pervert our flame,
But with the good or bad, be still the same.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PLEASURES OF A SINGLE LIFE, OR,
THE MISERIES OF MATRIMONY***


******* This file should be named 13800.txt or 13800.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/3/8/0/13800



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
