The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Case of Mrs. Clive, by Catherine Clive

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Case of Mrs. Clive

Author: Catherine Clive

Release Date: October 27, 2004 [EBook #13881]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CASE OF MRS. CLIVE ***




Produced by David Starner, Susan Skinner and the PG Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.





﻿
THE AUGUSTAN REPRINT SOCIETY


CATHERINE CLIVE


THE CASE OF Mrs. _CLIVE_

(1744)



_Introduction by_

RICHARD C. FRUSHELL



To

H.T. Swedenberg, Junior

_founder, protector, friend_

    _He that delights to_ Plant _and_ Set,
    _Makes_ After-Ages _in his_ Debt.

    Where could they find another formed so fit,
    To poise, with solid sense, a sprightly wit?
    Were these both wanting, as they both abound,
    Where could so firm integrity be found?


The verse and emblem are from George Wither, _A Collection of Emblems,
Ancient and Modern_ (London, 1635), illustration xxxv, page 35.

The lines of poetry (123-126) are from "To My Honoured Kinsman John
Driden," in John Dryden, _The Works of John Dryden_, ed. Sir Walter
Scott, rev. and corr. George Saintsbury (Edinburgh: William Patterson,
1885), xi, 78.


       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL EDITORS

William E. Conway, William Andrews Clark Memorial Library
George Robert Guffey, University of California, Los Angeles
Maximillian E. Novak, University of California, Los Angeles
David S. Rodes, University of California, Los Angeles


ADVISORY EDITORS

Richard C. Boys, University of Michigan
James L. Clifford, Columbia University
Ralph Cohen, University of Virginia
Vinton A. Dearing, University of California, Los Angeles
Arthur Friedman, University of Chicago
Louis A. Landa, Princeton University
Earl Miner, Princeton University
Samuel H. Monk, University of Minnesota
Everett T. Moore, University of California, Los Angeles
Lawrence Clark Powell, William Andrews Clark Memorial Library
James Sutherland, University College, London
H.T. Swedenberg, Jr., University of California, Los Angeles
Robert Vosper, William Andrews Clark Memorial Library
Curt A. Zimansky, State University of Iowa


CORRESPONDING SECRETARY

Edna C. Davis, William Andrews Clark Memorial Library


EDITORIAL ASSISTANT

Jean T. Shebanek, William Andrews Clark Memorial Library


Typography by Wm. M. Cheney




INTRODUCTION


Among other things, the licensing act of 1737 stipulated that Covent
Garden and Drury Lane exclusively were the patented and licensed
theaters (respectively) in London, a fact directly related to the revolt
of prestigious players six years later. Although there were sporadic
performances of "legitimate" drama in unlicensed playhouses between 1737
and 1743, full-time professional actors and actresses were in effect
locked into the approved theaters during the regular theatrical season.
Suspecting a cartel directed against them personally and professionally
by the "Bashas" Rich at Covent Garden and Fleetwood at Drury Lane,[1]
the players from Drury Lane in the summer of 1743 banded together and
refused to perform the next season until salaries and playing conditions
improved. Tardy and partial payment of salary was the surface sore
point, unprincipled and unwarranted manipulation by the managers the
underlying one. As the Macklin-Garrick quarrel attests,[2] the conflict
was not only between labor and management; but the latter confrontation
is central to the conflict in 1743 and the subject of _The Case of Mrs.
Clive Submitted to the Publick_, published in October, 1744, by which
time Catherine (Kitty) Clive had established herself as not only first
lady of comedy but also as somewhat of a patriot of the acting
profession and the Drury Lane company.

Coming to Drury Lane in 1728 while still in her teens, Kitty Rafter
(1711-1785) quickly became a favorite of the town by virtue of her
singing voice, vivacity, and gift for mimicry. Admired first as a
singing actress, Miss Rafter in 1731 gave unequivocal notice of her
considerable talent as a comic actress in the role of Nell in Coffey's
_The Devil to Pay_, one of several hundred she mastered. Her
specialties: Flora in _The Wonder_, Lady Bab in _High Life Below
Stairs_, Lappet in _The Miser_, Catherine in _Catherine and Petruchio_,
Mrs. Heidelberg in _The Clandestine Marriage_, and the Fine Lady in
_Lethe_. Mrs. Clive's (on 4 Oct. 1733, Miss Rafter married George Clive,
a barrister) popularity as comedienne and performer of prologues and
epilogues is indicated by the frequency of her performances and long
tenure at Drury Lane (she retired in 1769) and documented by the
panegyrics of Fielding, Murphy, Churchill, Garrick, Dr. Johnson, Horace
Walpole, Goldsmith, fellow players, contemporary memoir writers, and
audiences who admired her.[3] Dr. Johnson, I feel, gives the most
balanced, just contemporary appraisal of Mrs. Clive the actress: "What
Clive did best, she did better than Garrick; but could not do half so
many things well; she was a better romp than any I ever saw in
nature."[4] Part of the half she could not do well were tragedy roles,
attested to by Thomas Davies, who comments on her performances as
Ophelia in _Hamlet_ and Zara in _The Mourning Bride_: "Of Mrs. Clive's
Ophelia I shall only say, that I regret that the first comic actress in
the world should so far mistake her talents as to attempt it." And on
Zara, "for her own benefit, the comic Clive put on the royal robes of
Zara: she found them too heavy, and, very wisely, never wore them
afterwards."[5] Part of the half she could do well is noticed, once
again, by Davies: particularly adroit and distinguished in chambermaid
parts, Mrs. Clive

     excelled also in characters of caprice and affectation, from the
     high-bred Lady Fanciful to the vulgar Mrs. Heidelberg; in country
     girls, romps, hoydens and dowdies, superannuated beauties, viragos
     and humourists; she had an inimitable talent in ridiculing the
     extravagant action and impertinent consequence of an
     Opera-singer--of which she gave an excellent specimen in _Lethe_.
     Her mirth was so genuine that whether it was restrained to the arch
     sneer, and suppressed half-laugh, or extended to the downright
     honest burst of loud laughter, the audience was sure to accompany
     her [my punctuation].[6]

Mrs. Clive's stature as a comic actress would, then, seemingly make her
a prize for Rich or Fleetwood, but they did their best to thwart her
career and happiness at their theaters.

I suspect that their motivation in so doing was fear that her temper,
her influence with other actors and her audiences, and her strong
loyalty to her profession would hinder their legislated power to control
absolutely London theaters, players, and audiences in 1743. Not much
investigation is required to see Mrs. Clive at her clamoring best, at
various times head to head with Susannah Cibber, Peg Woffington,
Woodward, Shuter, or Garrick. Her letters to Garrick show that as late
as the sixties she was quite capable of vitriol when she felt that she
or her friends were unjustly treated. Tate Wilkinson was surely correct
in describing her as "a mixture of combustibles; she was passionate,
cross, and vulgar," often simultaneously.[7] If this were the case in
mere greenroom tiffs or casual correspondence, how the ire of "the
Clive" must have been excited by the cartelists, who did their utmost to
keep her out of joint and almost out of sight.

In 1733, Fielding, who furthered Mrs. Clive's career by writing and
editing parts of his plays for her and publicly praising her as a woman
and as an actress, wrote the following encomium on her professional
integrity in his "Epistle to Mrs. Clive," prefatory to _The Intriguing
Chambermaid_:

     The part you have maintained in the present dispute between the
     players and the patentees, is so full of honour, that had it been
     in higher life, it would have given you the reputation of the
     greatest heroine of the age. You looked on the cases of Mr.
     Highmore and Mrs. Wilks with compassion, nor could any promises or
     views of interest sway you to desert them; nor have you scrupled
     any fatigue ... to support the cause of those whom you imagine
     injured and distressed; and for this you have been so far from
     endeavouring to exact an exorbitant reward from persons little able
     to afford it, that I have known you to offer to act for nothing,
     rather than the patentees should be injured by the dismission of
     the audience.[8]

Fielding is, of course, referring to the 1733 dispute in which Mrs.
Clive (and Macklin) among the principal players stayed with the
ineffective proprietor of Drury Lane, John Highmore. Jealous that
Highmore and not he gained control of Drury Lane after former
shareholders either died or sold out, Theophilus Cibber demanded, among
other things, that Highmore share profits with his players rather than
pay fixed salaries. He then led the Drury Lane players in revolt in the
autumn of 1733 to the New Haymarket where they played without a license
until March of the 1733-1734 season, at which time they returned to
Drury Lane under the new management of Fleetwood. The actors at least
partially won this battle, and although Highmore tried to have the
vagrant act enforced, the players returned to Drury Lane unscathed. With
Highmore gone, a period of uneasy peace obtained. The players, however,
were not to win so easily the next dispute, the one that took place
after the passage of the licensing act.[9]

Mrs. Clive's decision to stay with Highmore rather than defect was
probably made because "two women--Mrs. Wilks, the widow of her [Kitty's]
old theatrical idol, and Mrs. Booth--were in he direction of the
theater.[10] But in light of Fielding's words and her actions and
statements in regard to the welfare of Drury Lane and its actors
throughout her career, I believe that Mrs. Clive, although not pleased
with aspects of Highmore's reign, also refused to defect because she
felt that the manager was basically in the right, that her fellow
players would be destitute or at least open to hardship without
employment there, and that the audiences would take offense at such
unprofessional and selfish behavior from their "servants." The "Town,"
as her own play _The Rehearsal_ (I.i. 159-170) shows, was always her
judge in matters professional.

Fielding's prologue to his revised _Author's Farce_ (1734), spoken by
Mrs. Clive, compares the settled, prosperous former days at Drury Lane
with those of 1734, when "... _alas! how alter'd is our Case!/ I view
with Tears this poor deserted Place_."[11] With few exceptions, the
"place" continued strangely in decline even with a competent company and
often with a full house. The falling-off continued until the advent of
Garrick, who with Lacy in 1747 co-managed the theater into a new era.

From the mid-thirties until 1743, Mrs. Clive appears in roles she had
made famous as well as those newly written with her particular talents
in mind. Fielding, turning more and more to political satire and soon to
another literary form, had little need of her services;[12] but others
did, and the years between the licensing act and 1743 find Mrs. Clive in
demand as the affected lady of quality, speaker of humorous epilogues,
performer in Dublin, and singer of such favorites as "Ellen-a-Roon,"
"The Cuckoo," and "The Life of a Beau." This period is also marked by
Mrs. Clive's first professional venture with David Garrick, in his
_Lethe_, the beginning of a relationship to become one of the most
tempestuous and fruitful in all theater history.

As I intimated at the outset, the licensing act mainly troubled the
London players because of the power of monopoly it invested in Fleetwood
and Rich. Not only were the forums for dramatic presentation now
restricted, but so was professional freedom. The problem, therefore, was
as much philosophical as it was geographical. From the sixteenth century
to 1737, English players had some freedom (albeit limited) to rebel from
intolerable authority and to form their own company.[13] This freedom,
this choice, as Lord Chesterfield pointed out in his speech against the
act, was severely attenuated in 1737, and was to remain so in varying
degrees until the monopoly the act allowed was legislated dead in 1843.
But it was a cartel between the managers that the players most feared,
and there is evidence in the pamphlets growing out of the struggle of
1743 that such a fear was well-founded.

The playing conditions at Drury Lane in the early forties were not good,
a situation directly attributable to the ineptitude and highhandedness
of Fleetwood (and his treasurer Pierson) and his refusal to pay salaries
in full and on time. The manager's accommodating side-show performers in
his company did not help. Macklin, as Fleetwood's lieutenant, had to try
to pacify actors, workmen, creditors; as actor he commiserated with the
players. With the coming of Garrick from Goodman's Fields to Drury Lane
late in the 1741-1742 season and with a progressively disgruntled Clive
all the principals in the revolt are under one--leaky--roof.

In light of the number and variety of the published commentary which
accompanied the revolt, perhaps a highlighting of Clive's _Case_ would
be the most efficient way to elucidate some of the major difficulties
involved. After addressing herself to "the Favour of the Publick," with
encouragement from her friends,[14] Mrs. Clive strikes the key note of
her essay: injustice and oppression, specifically seen in the cartel's
threat to "Custom," an iterative word throughout the essay. Mrs. Clive
first speaks of salary, a matter obviously important to her "Liberty and
Livelihood."[15] One writer on the dispute, in a quasi-satirical tract,
denounces the managers in this regard and in so doing echoes Mrs. Clive:
"When there are but two Theatres allowed of, shall the Masters of those
two Houses league together, and oblige the Actors either to take what
Salary or Treatment they graciously vouchsafe to offer them, and to be
parcelled out and confined to this House or t'other, just as they in
their Wisdoms think meet; or else to be banished the Kingdom for a
Livelihood? This is Tyranny with a Vengeance--but perhaps these generous
noble-spirited Masters may intend their Performers a Compliment in it,
and by thus fixing them to one Place, effectually wipe off that odious
Appellation of Vagabonds, which has been sometimes given them."[16] The
licensing act, subsequent cartel, and mistreatment of players were then
not only in the mind of Mrs. Clive. Treated in most of the arguments for
or against the players was salary, but it was only a cover hiding an
underlying malaise.

Implying that the managers set out to ruin certain performers, including
herself, Mrs. Clive accuses them of putting on "a better Face to the
Town" by publishing (inaccurate) salary figures--a ploy to get public
sanction for lower salaries. Mrs. Clive alludes to salaries published
ostensibly by Fleetwood in the papers (e.g., _Gentleman's Magazine_,
XIII, October 1743, 553), where the pay of such lights as Garrick,
Macklin, Pritchard, and Clive in the 1742-1743 season is made to seem
higher than the salaries of such worthies as Wilks, Betterton, Cibber,
and Oldfield in the 1708-1709 season. The actors, in presenting their
case (_Gentleman's Magazine_, XIII, November 1743, 609), hit at
Fleetwood for citing 1708-1709 salaries, for "the Stage [then] both of
_Drury-Lane_ and the _Hay-market_, were in so wretched a Condition ...
as not to be worth any body's Acceptance." The players use instead
salaries of the 1729 players "to place the salaries of the present
Actors in a true light," since the stage in that year flourished. In
1729, Wilks, the highest paid actor, earned more than his later equal,
Garrick. All other principals' salaries were comparable.

The main complaint of Fleetwood's company, then, was not only base
salary but the "Fallacy" of the manager's account and his "setting down
besides the Manager's Charges, every benefit Night, what is got by the
Actor's own private Interests in Money and Tickets, as also the Article
of 50L for Cloaths, added to the Actresses Account, which is absolutely
an Advantage to the Manager, as they always lay out considerably more."
This evidence, if not in itself damning to Fleetwood's designs toward
his actors, at least indicates the internecine breach at Drury Lane.
(The inter-theater conflict, important for its effect on repertory and
morale, is adequately examined in theater histories and lies outside my
interests in this essay.)

Mrs. Clive admits, however, that reduced, unpaid, or "handled" salaries
were not the first fear of the actors; it was instead, she says, the
fear of what "would happen from an Agreement supposed to be concluded
betwixt the two Managers, which made 'em apprehend, that if they
submitted to act under such Agreements, they must be absolutely in the
Managers Power." As the writer of _The Case Between the Managers_ (p.
11) presents it, a conversation between a personified Covent Garden and
Drury Lane would have gone like this: "Well, but, Brother _Drury_, we
can manage that matter [how to keep audiences]--Suppose you and I make a
Cartel; for instance, agree for every other Theatre, and oblige
ourselves by this Cartel to reduce by near one half the Salaries of our
principal Performers--I'gad, we may cramp 'em rarely this way--they must
serve us at any rate we tax their Merit at, for they'll then have no
where else to go to." Drury Lane responds, "D--n me, if that is not
divinely thought--my dear Friend, give me a Kiss."

Late in the summer of 1743, several months before the salary figures
described above, Garrick, Macklin, Clive, and Mrs. Pritchard among the
principal players attempted to obtain another license to set up their
own company in the Haymarket: shades of 1733. They applied to the
Chamberlain Grafton--who denied it, in part perhaps because put out that
Garrick commanded over L500 a year. There was no chance, therefore, to
sidestep the monopoly effected by the licensing act. Leading the
secession, Garrick agreed with his colleagues to stay out until redress
was forthcoming. Redress did not come, the defectors lost, Fleetwood
won. He starved them in not out, Garrick was persuaded to return to
Drury Lane (which he does in early December, 1743) by the entreaties of
several of the destitute seceded players who asked him to accede to
Fleetwood's terms. As Garrick explains to Macklin (see note 2), he did
so because he had the economic welfare of his fellow actors at heart.
Macklin infuriated with him and Clive disappointed in him, both refused
to accept Garrick's decision, and hence became renegade. Macklin,
uninvited back by Fleetwood, admired Olive's decision to have no part in
signing a petition presented to her by her fellow defectors who
understood that the refusal of a separate license dissolved their bond.
Macklin writes in his Reply to _Mr. Garrick's Answer_ (p. 27) that "it
ought to be known that when this Letter was carried to Mrs. Clive, and
her Name to it desired, she had the Honour and Spirit to refuse, upon
any Consideration, to be made so ridiculous a Tool to so base a
Purpose."

Others were not so generous as Macklin. The author of _The Disputes
between the Director of D----y, and the Pit Potentates,_ one "B.Y.,"
champions the cause of the non-principal players against such as Mrs.
Clive, "for the low-salary'd Players are always at the labouring Oar,
and at constant Expence, while the rest are serv'd up once or twice in a
Week each, as very fine Dishes," one of whom, he says, is Mrs. Clive, an
"avaritious" person whom he is confident "has found, and feels, her
Error by this Time."[17] The writer then details the particular
hardships of Mrs. Roberts, Mrs. Horton, and Mr. Mills, hardships caused
by such greedy principals as Clive. B.Y. obviously chose to ignore the
compassion of Mrs. Clive for the low-salaried players expressed in her
Case.

Evidence that Mrs. Clive was in no position to be avaricious and that a
debilitating cartel in fact existed is found in her own essay. When the
defected players returned to Drury Lane (except Macklin, whom Fleetwood
considered the cause of the theater's troubles) late in 1743, Fleetwood
offered Mrs. Clive a salary incompatible with her talent and lower than
his previous "agreements" with her. Clive says, "They were such as I was
advis'd not to accept, because it was known they were proposed for no
reason but to insult me, and make me seek for better at the other
Theatre; for I knew it had been settled, by some dark Agreement, that
Part of the Actors were to go to Covent-Garden Theatre, and others to
Drury-Lane."

Led to believe that she would find comfort and acceptance at Covent
Garden based on previous encouragement by Rich to have her join his
company,[18] Mrs. Clive realized that the dark agreement was a fact, for
"When I apply'd to him, he offered me exactly the same which I had
refused at the other Theatre." She managed a bit more salary, however,
and out of necessity agreed to play. More rankling to Mrs. Clive than
basic salary was her being forced to pay for her benefit. The extant
Clive-Garrick correspondence points to the pride she took in not only a
"clear" benefit but one held during that part of the month she dictated.
As is the case with salary, the basis for this complaint was
unreasonable manipulation by the managers, loss of freedom, and an
unjustified break with tradition: "I had had one [a benefit] clear of
all Expence for Nine Years before; an Advantage the first Performers had
been thought to merit for near Thirty Years, and had grown into a
Custom."

Mrs. Clive did not regularly play for Rich until December 1743, from
which time she "determined to stay there," doing all in her power to
please her audiences and him. Yet she "found, by his Behaviour to me, it
was designed I should not continue with him." Clive's specific
exposition of Rich's mistreatment of her is a portrait of an actress
aware of her worth and of a manager at his worst. Fired from Covent
Garden--against custom and justice--at the end of the season without
being told, Mrs. Clive could not arrange to play in Ireland, where she
was a great favorite,[19] for Rich's cheat did not become clear to her
until summer was too far advanced. Clive says it all when she observes
"it is unlawful to act any where but with them." Fleetwood was the only
alternative for the next season, and he still owed her £160. 12s. At the
time of Clive's Case (October, 1744) Fleetwood had not yet contacted her
for engagement at Drury Lane even though he could not "but know I am
disengag'd from the other Theatre." Nor could have Clive expected much
of a salary from him even if he did call on her since the last season he
offered her "not near half as much as he afterwards agreed to give
another Performer, and less than he then gave to some others in his
Company." Mrs. Clive could not but conclude that the managers were in
league to distress her.[20] In the final third of her essay, Mrs. Clive
presents a rather touching account of the personal costs of a piece of
legislation which was itself manipulated and "interpreted in the narrow
sense of forming the legal safeguard to the patent monopoly."[21]

The "Ladies" who had promised their protection to Mrs. Clive obviously
were influential in convincing Rich to re-hire her, for less than one
month after the appearance of Clive's Case the Prince of Wales and his
Princess sponsored at the Haymarket a concert for her benefit,[22] and
her name is regularly listed in the Covent Garden playbills soon after.
The absence of publicity from Mrs. Clive, or about her, suggests that
her second short year at Covent Garden was fairly acceptable to all
concerned, although Portia in _The Merchant of Venice_ was hardly her
forte.

The next season finds her back at Drury Lane, where she reigns
uncontested queen of comedy for more than twenty years. In addition to
the return of Clive, the 1745-1746 season (one poor in attendance and
new plays) at Drury Lane is noteworthy because of a reinstated Macklin,
a de-throned Fleetwood, a new manager (Lacy), a well-balanced company
soon to be augmented by player-manager Garrick, prospects for a bright
future--and a theatrical monopoly stronger than ever.[23] In the latter
regard Mrs. Clive's case is revealing in that it gives a new emphasis to
the epithet His Majesties' Servants.[24]

Indiana State University
Terre Haute






NOTES TO THE INTRODUCTION

[1] _The Dramatic Congress_ (London, 1743). Throughout I use short
titles.

[2] Three major documents concerning this quarrel are published under
the title _Mr. Macklin's Reply to Mr. Garrick's Answer_ (London, 1743).

[3] Mrs. Clive's four afterpieces, with their allusions to her
personality and career, are equally revealing. I treat this subject in
"An Edition of the Afterpieces of Kitty Clive," Diss. Duquesne Univ.
1968, and "The Textual Relationship and Biographical Significance of Two
Petite Pieces by Mrs. Catherine (Kitty) Clive," RECTR, 9 (May 1970),
51-58, and "Kitty Clive as Dramatist," _DUJ_, N.S., 32 No. 2 (March
1971), 125-132.

[4] James Boswell, _Boswell's Life of Johnson_, ed. George Birkbeck
Hill, rev. L.F. Powell (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1934-1950), IV, 243.

[5] _Dramatic Miscellanies_ (London, 1785), III, 131, 376.

[6] Quoted by [John Genest], _Some Account of the English Stage_ (Bath:
H.E. Carrington, 1832), V, 230.

[7] _Memoirs of His Own Life_ (York, 1790), II, 257. See _Theatrical
Correspondence in Death. An Epistle from Mrs. Oldfield_ (London, 1743),
p. 7.

[8] _The Complete Works of Henry Fielding, Esq._, ed. William Ernest
Henley (New York: Croscup & Sterling Co., [1902]; reprinted Barnes &
Noble, 1967), X, 277-278.

[9] For a useful exposition of the 1733 and 1743 disputes in terms of
the licensing act see Watson Nicholson, _The Struggle for a Free Stage
in London_ (Cambridge, Mass.: Archibald Constable & Co., 1906.).

[10] Percy Fitzgerald, _The Life of Mrs. Catherine Clive_ (London: A.
Reader, 1888), p. 24. P.J. Crean, "The Life and Times of Kitty Clive,"
Diss. Univ. of London, 1933, is, however, the authority on Clive's life.
I am indebted to Professor Crean.

[11] Quoted in Mary E. Knapp, _Prologues and Epilogues of the Eighteenth
Century_ (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1961), p. 69.

[12] Yet, with Fitzgerald (_Life_, p. 34), I believe that Fielding could
have helped Mrs. Clive ready her Case for the press. Certainly the
"correctness" of that printed text could not have been achieved by her
alone. Cf. Clive's MS letters, Appendix, "An Edition of the
Afterpieces."

[13] See Crean, "Life and Times," p. 215. A pertinent example of actors'
seeking redress is, of course, the revolt of 1694-1695, described by
John Downes, _Roscius Anglicanus_ (London. 1708), pp. 43-44; Augustan
Reprint Society publication number 134 (Los Angeles, 1969), with an
Introduction by John Loftis, is a facsimile of the first edition.

[14] See Arthur H. Scouten, "Introduction," _The London Stage_
(Carbondale, III.: Southern Illinois University Press, 1961), Pt. 3,
xcv, cxlvii, and Dramatic Congress, p. 20.

[15] Cf. James Ralph, _The Case of our Present Theatrical Disputes_
(London, 1743), pp. 3, 48.

[16] _The Case Between the Managers of the Two Theatres, and their
Principal Actors_ (London, 1743, misdated 1713), p. 20. Cf. _An
Impartial Examen_ (London, 1744), pp. 10-11, 21-22. See also the three
_Queries_ pamphlets: _Queries to be Answered by the Manager of
Drury-Lane_ (London, 1743); _Queries upon Queries_ (London, 1743); _A
Full Answer to Queries upon Queries_ (London, 1743).

[17] (London, 1744), pp. 15-16.

[18] _Dramatic Congress_, p. 22. Thomas Davies, _Memoirs of the Life of
David Garrick_, 3rd Ed. (London, 1781), I, 90, says of Rich: he "seems
to have imbibed, from his very early years, a dislike of the people with
whom he was obliged to live and converse."

[19] See Clive's afterpiece _The Faithful Irish Woman_ in "An Edition of
the Afterpieces."

[20] See _Mr. Macklin's Reply to Mr. Garrick's Answer_, pp. 18, 29-30,
and _An Impartial Examen_, pp. 10-11.

[21] Nicholson, _Struggle for a Free Stage_, p. 124; see, too, pp.
83-86.

[22] Crean, "Life and Times," p. 254 n. 1, points out that on the very
day of this benefit (2 Nov.) a second notice of Mrs. Clive's Case
appeared.

[23] See Nicholson's concluding chapter. For other effects of the
licensing act see Scouten, _London Stage_, cxlvii, and Ralph, _Case of
the Present Theatrical Disputes_, pp. 22, 43.

[24] Since the pamphlets cited here are scarce, some rare, perhaps the
following list of locations will prove helpful. Full titles and partial
bibliographical information are available in Robert W. Lowe, _A
Bibliographical Account of English Theatrical Literature_ (London: J.C.
Nimmo, 1888), p. 95.

_Dramatic Congress_, Univ. Chicago, Austrian Coll., PR 3346. C3D7 1743.

_Mr. Macklin's Reply_, Newberry Library, V1845. 54.

_Theatrical Correspondence in Death_, Harvard, Thr 417. 43. 12.

_Case of Present Theatrical Disputes_, Newberry Library, Rare Book Room.

_Case Between the Managers_, Univ. Chicago, Austrian Coll., PN 2596.
L6C22.

_An Impartial Examen_, Harvard, Thr 465. 20. 23.

_Queries to be Answered_, Harvard, Thr 465. 20. 22.

_Queries upon Queries_, Harvard, Thur 465. 20. 12.

_A Full Answer to Queries_, Harvard, Thr 465. 20. 12.

_Disputes between the Director_, Univ. Chicago, Austrian Coll., PN 2596.
L7D832.

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

The facsimile of _The Case of Mrs. Clive_ (1744) is reproduced from a
copy of the first edition (Shelf Mark: PN 2598. C45A2) in The Lilly
Library, Indiana University. The total type-page (p. 9) measures 145 X
78 mm.



       *       *       *       *       *


THE CASE OF MRS. _CLIVE_

[Price Six Pence.]


       *       *       *       *       *


THE CASE OF MRS. _CLIVE_

Submitted to the PUBLICK.

[Illustration: Printer's trophy-style decoration]

_LONDON:_

Printed for B. DOD at the _Bible_ and _Key_ in _Ave-Mary-Lane_ near
_Stationers-Hall_. MDCCXLIV.

[Price Six Pence.]


       *       *       *       *       *

THE CASE OF MRS. _CLIVE_

Submitted to the PUBLICK.


In order to put an End to ſome falſe Reports, which have been raiſed in
Relation to my not acting this Seaſon, as well as to beſpeak the Favour
of the Publick, I have, by the Advice of my Friends, ventured to addreſs
my ſelf to them, from whom I have received many and great Marks of
Favour, and whoſe further Protection I now ſtand in need of.

I know Appeals of this Nature, which relate to Diſputes that happen at a
Theatre, are by ſome thought preſuming and impertinent, ſuppoſing they
are too trifling to demand Attention: But, as I perſuade my ſelf that
Injuſtice and Oppreſſion are by no means thought Matters of Indifference
by any who have Humanity, I hope I ſhall not be thought to take too
great a Liberty. I am the more encouraged to hope this from Experience;
it having been obſerved, that thoſe Performers, who have had the
Happineſs to pleaſe on the Stage, and who never did any thing to offend
the Publick, whenever they have been injured by thoſe who preſided over
Theatres, have ſeldom, if ever, failed of Redreſs upon repreſenting the
Hardſhips they met with: And, as I at this time, apprehend my ſelf to
be greatly oppreſſed by the Managers of both Theatres, I hope I ſhall be
juſtified in taking this Method of acquainting the Publick with my Caſe,
ſubmitting it to their Determination.

Before the Diſputes happened betwixt the Manager of _Drury-Lane_ Theatre
and his Actors, I had articled for Five Years to receive Three Hundred
Pounds a Year, tho' another Performer on that Stage received for Seven
Years Five Hundred Guineas, _per_ Year; and at the Expiration of my
Agreements the Manager offered me an additional Salary to continue at
that Theatre.

And ſince I have mentioned thoſe Diſputes, which ended ſo greatly to the
Diſadvantage of the Actors, I muſt beg Leave to endeavour to ſet that
Matter in a clear Light, which hitherto has been miſrepreſented to the
Publick: I think my ſelf obliged to this, as the Hardſhips I at preſent
labour under are owing to that Diſagreement; if any think I treat this
Matter too ſeriouſly, I hope they will remember, that however trifling
ſuch Things may appear to them, to me, who am ſo much concerned in 'em,
they are of great Importance, ſuch as my Liberty and Livelihood depend
on.

As only two Theatres were authoriſed, the Managers thought it was in
their Power to reduce the Incomes of thoſe Performers, who could not
live independant of their Profeſſion; but in order to make this appear
with a better Face to the Town, it was agreed to complain of the Actors
Salaries being too great, and accordingly a falſe Account was publiſhed
of them in the daily Papers, by whom I will not ſay: Whether, or no,
ſome particular Salaries were ſo, I will not pretend to determine; yet,
in the whole, they did not amount to more than had been allowed for
many Years, when the Theatre was under a frugal and exact Regulation;
when the Managers punctually fulfilled, not only all Engagements to
their Actors, but to every other Perſon concerned in the Theatre, and
raiſed very conſiderable Fortunes for themſelves.

But ſuppoſing the Expence of the Theatre too high, I am very certain it
was not the Actors refuſing to ſubmit to a proper Reduction of them,
which made ſo many of them quit the Stage, but from great Hardſhips they
underwent, and greater which they feared would happen from an Agreement
ſuppoſed to be concluded betwixt the two Managers, which made 'em
apprehend, that if they ſubmitted to act under ſuch Agreements, they
muſt be abſolutely in the Managers Power; and the Event has proved that
their Fears were not ill-grounded, as I doubt not but I ſhall make
appear.

When the Actors Affairs obliged 'em to return to the Theatres laſt
Winter, under ſuch Abatements of their Salaries as hardly afforded the
greater Part of them a Subſiſtence, I was offered, by the Manager of
_Drury-Lane_ Theatre, ſuch Terms as bore no Proportion to what he gave
other Performers, or to thoſe he had offered me at the beginning of the
Seaſon. They were ſuch as I was adviſ'd not to accept, becauſe it was
known they were propoſed for no reaſon but to inſult me, and make me
ſeek for better at the other Theatre; for I knew it had been ſettled, by
ſome dark Agreement, that Part of the Actors were to go to
_Covent-Garden_ Theatre, and others to _Drury-Lane_; I did, indeed,
apprehend I ſhould meet with better Terms at _Covent-Garden_, becauſe
that Manager had made many Overtures to get me into his Company the
preceding Seaſon, and many times before: But when I apply'd to him, he
offered me exactly the ſame which I had refuſed at the other Theatre,
and which I likewiſe rejected, but was perſuaded to accept ſome very
little better, rather than ſeem obſtinate in not complying as well as
others, and yielded ſo far to the Neceſſity of the Time, as to Act under
a much leſs Salary than ſeveral other Performers on that Stage, and
ſubmitted to pay a Sum of Money for my Benefit, notwithſtanding I had
had one clear of all Expence for Nine Years before; an Advantage the
firſt Performers had been thought to merit for near Thirty Years, and
had grown into a Cuſtom.

When I was fixed at that Theatre I determined to ſtay there; I did, in
all things which related to my Profeſſon, ſubmit intirely to that
Manager's Direction, and, with the help of other principal Performers,
did greatly promote his Intereſt, as was evident from the Audiences
after we went to Act there; but I found, by his Behaviour to me, it was
deſigned I ſhould not continue with him, but return the next Seaſon to
_Drury-Lane._

The Agreements betwixt that Manager and me were verbal, but made before
two Gentlemen of Character and Fortune, on whom I muſt depend for the
fulfilling of them; they were for one Year. At the end of the
Acting-ſeaſon the Manager ſent an Office-keeper to me with ſome Salary
that was due, who required a Receipt in full; I told him a very great
Part of my Agreements were yet due, and requeſted to ſee the Manager,
who came and acknowledged them, and promiſed to bring one of the
Gentlemen who was preſsent at our Ingagements in a Day or two and pay me,
and then he ſaid he had done with me; but he has not paid me, nor have I
ever ſeen him ſince, or as much as heard from him.

It has always been a Cuſtom in Theatres, that if ever any Actor or
Actreſs was to be diſcharged, or their Allowance leſſen'd, they were
acquainted with it at the End of the Seaſon; the Reaſon of this will
appear to be the giving them a proper Notice to provide for themſelves:
This the Manager of _Covent-Garden_ did to all his Company whom he
deſigned to diſcharge, or whoſe Allowance was to be leſſen'd, except to
me, which made me actually then conclude he determined I ſhould
continue with him, 'till I was undeceived by his Play-Bills with the
Names of other Actreſſes in Parts I uſed to perform; ſo that he has not
only broke thro' the Cuſtoms of the Theatre, but thoſe in practice
almoſt every where, in diſmiſſing me, and has done me a real Injury in
ſuch an unprecedented Act of Injuſtice; for had I been informed of his
Deſign at the End of the Seaſon, I could have made Terms to have acted
in _Ireland_, where I had met with moſt uncommon Civilities, and
received very great Advantages, which I ſhall ever remember with the
utmoſt Gratitude, and take this and every other Opportunity to
acknowledge.

As I have ſaid, it has been a Cuſtom to give Actors Notice of a
Diſcharge: I muſt at the ſame time obſerve, That it never was a Cuſtom
to diſcharge any, but upon Neglect of their Buſineſs, or ſuch as were
obnoxious to the Publick; this Maxim extended even to thoſe of the
loweſt Claſs; but to thoſe, on whoſe Performances the Town had been
pleaſed to ſtamp a Value, by their Indulgence and Applauſe, the Stage
was always a Support, even after Age or any Accident had made 'em
incapable of their Profeſſion; for the then Patentees thought it as
great a Piece of Inſolence to deprive the Publick of their Pleaſures, as
of Cruelty and Injuſtice to deny thoſe a Subſiſtence who had contributed
towards 'em; for they knew and acknowledged, that the Publick was the
only Support of all, conſequently had an indiſputable Right to be
pleaſed in the beſt manner poſſible.

It is pretended by the Managers, that they have the ſame Right to
diſcharge an Actor that a Maſter has to turn away a Servant, than which
nothing can be more falſe and abſurd; for, when a Maſter diſmiſſes a
Servant, there are many thouſands beſides to apply to; but when the
Managers diſmiſs an Actor, where are they to apply? It is unlawful to
act any where but with them; Neceſſity or Inclination brings every one
to the Stage; if the former happens to be the Caſe, they will not
readily find an Employment; and if the latter, they will not be fit for
one; ſo that it will appear an Act of great Injuſtice and Oppreſſion. If
it ſhould be objected, That the Actors Demands are ſo exorbitant, that
the Managers cannot comply with 'em? I have already endeavoured to ſhow,
that tho' two or three Salaries might be thought ſo in general, they did
not amount to more than had been allowed, and very conſiderable Profits
ariſing to the Patentees. But there is a very melancholy Inſtance, that
the Actors Demands is not the Reaſon of diſmiſſing 'em, but the Will of
the Manager alone; since laſt Seaſon an Actor and Actreſs returned to
_Drury-Lane_ under ſuch Abatements as that Manager thought proper, and
ſuch as were in no degree equal to their Merit; and yet, at the
beginning of this Seaſon, were diſmiſſed, after having been from their
Infancy on the Stage, and having no other Profeſſions to live by, and
very numerous Families to ſupport.

The Manager of _Drury-Lane_ tho' he can't but know I am diſengag'd from
the other Theatre, has not made any Application to me to act with him,
which he has done to ſeveral others who quitted that Stage at the Time I
did: The Reaſons which obliged me to leave him ſtill ſubſiſt: He owes
me a Hundred and Sixty Pounds, twelve Shillings, which he has
acknowledged to be juſtly due, and promiſed Payment of it by laſt
_Chriſtmas_ to a Perſon of too great Conſequence for me to mention here,
the greater Part of it Money I expended for Cloaths for his Uſe. He
offer'd me, laſt Seaſon, not near half as much as he afterwards agreed
to give another Performer, and leſs than he then gave to ſome others in
his Company; ſo that I muſt conclude, as every one knows there are
Agreements betwixt the Managers, that there is a Deſign to diſtreſs me,
and reduce me to ſuch Terms as I cannot comply with.

I am ſorry I am reduced to ſay any thing in favour of myſelf; but, as I
think I merit as much as another Performer, and the Managers are ſo
deſirous to convince me of the contrary, I hope I ſhall be excuſed;
eſpecially when I declare, that at this time, I am not in the leaſt vain
of my Profeſſion.

As to my Performances, the Audience are the only, proper Judges: But I
may venture to affirm, That my Labour, and Application, have been
greater than any other Performers on the Stage. I have not only acted in
almoſt all the Plays, but in Farces and Muſical Entertainments; and very
frequently two Parts in a Night, even to the Prejudice of my Health. I
have been at a very great Expence in Maſters for Singing; for which
Article alone, the Managers now give five and ſix Pounds a Week. My
additional Expences, in belonging to the Theatre, amount to upwards of
one Hundred Pounds a Year, in Clothes, and other Neceſſaries; and the
pretended great Salaries, of ten and twelve Pounds a Week, which have
been ſo artfully, and falſly repreſented to the Town, to the Prejudice
of the Actors, will, upon Enquiry, appear to be no more than half as
much, ſince they performed half Seaſon, at the Theatres, very ſeldom
above three or four Days a Week; ſo taking in the long Vacation, when
there are no Plays at all, to thoſe Days the preſent Managers omit
acting, a Salary which appears to be great, will be found, in effect, to
be very moderate; and thoſe which are leſs, not a Sufficiency.

I have now finiſhed all I propoſed; I have ſhown in how aggravating a
manner, without any Reaſon aſſigned, and at a Time a very conſiderable
Sum of Money was owing to me, I have been turn'd out of _Covent-Garden_
Theatre. The Manager of _Drury-Lane,_ tho' he can't but know what juſt
Reaſons I had for quitting him, has never apply'd to me to return, nor
made the leaſt Excuſe for not paying my Arrears, tho' due ſo long, and
after promiſing Payment near a Year, notwithſtanding I have, for many
Years, not only endeavour'd, but ſucceeded, in greatly promoting that
Manager's Intereſt, as is known to himſelf and his whole Company.

The Reaſon of my taking the Liberty to communicate theſe Things to the
Publick, is moſt earneſtly to interceed for their Favour and Protection,
from whom I have always met with great Generoſity and Indulgence: For,
as I have already declared, in a Letter publiſhed by me laſt Year in the
Daily Papers, that I had not a Fortune to ſupport me, independent of my
Profeſſion, I doubt not but it will appear, I have not made any
conſiderable Acquiſition to it ſince, having not received two Hundred
Pounds Salary for acting in Plays, Farces, and Singing; tho' other
Performers have received more than twice that Sum. I have, in
Conſideration of theſe Hardſhips, been promiſed the Protection of many
Ladies, to whom I have the Honour to be perſonally known, and will not
doubt the Concurrence of the Publick, in receiving my Performance in the
beſt manner I am, at preſent, capable of, which I ſhall always moſt
gratefully Acknowledge.

C. CLIVE

FINIS.


       *       *       *       *       *


WILLIAM ANDREWS CLARK MEMORIAL LIBRARY

UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, LOS ANGELES

THE AUGUSTAN REPRINT SOCIETY

PUBLICATIONS IN PRINT


       *       *       *       *       *


The Augustan Reprint Society

PUBLICATIONS IN PRINT


1948-1949

16. Henry Nevil Payne, _The Fatal Jealousie_ (1673).

17. Nicholas Rowe. _Some Account of the Life of Mr. William Shakespear_
(1709).

18. Anonymous, "Of Genius," in _The Occasional Paper_, Vol. III, No. 10
(1719), and Aaron Hill, Preface to _The Creation_ (1720).


1949-1950

19. Susanna Centlivre, _The Busie Body_ (1709).

20. Lewis Theobald, _Preface to the Works of Shakespeare_ (1734).

22. Samuel Johnson, _The Vanity of Human Wishes_ (1749), and two
_Rambler_ papers (1750).

23. John Dryden, _His Majesties Declaration Defended_ (1681).


1951-1952

26. Charles Macklin, _The Man of the World_ (1792).

31. Thomas Gray, _An Elegy Wrote in a Country Churchyard_ (1751), and
_The Eton College Manuscript_.


1952-1953

41. Bernard Mandeville, _A Letter to Dion_ (1732).


1962-1963

98. Selected Hymns Taken Out of Mr. Herbert's _Temple_ ... (1697).


1964-1965

109. Sir William Temple, _An Essay Upon the Original and Nature of
Government_ (1680).

110. John Tutchin, _Selected Poems_ (1685-1700).

111. Anonymous, _Political Justice_ (1736).

112. Robert Dodsley, _An Essay on Fable_ (1764).

113. T.R., _An Essay Concerning Critical and Curious Learning_ (1698).

114. Two Poems Against Pope: Leonard Welsted. _One Epistle to Mr. A.
Pope_ (1730), and Anonymous, _The Blatant Beast_ (1742).


1965-1966

115. Daniel Defoe and others, _Accounts of the Apparition of Mrs. Veal_.

116. Charles Macklin, _The Covent Garden Theatre_ (1752).

117. Sir Roger L'Estrange, _Citt and Bumpkin_ (1680).

118. Henry More, _Enthusiasmus Triumphatus_ (1662).

119. Thomas Traherne, _Meditations on the Six Days of the Creation_
(1717).

120. Bernard Mandeville, _Aesop Dress'd or a Collection of Fables_
(1740).


1966-1967

123. Edmond Malone, _Cursory Observations on the Poems Attributed to Mr.
Thomas Rowley_ (1782).

124. Anonymous, _The Female Wits_ (1704).

125. Anonymous, _The Scribleriad_ (1742). Lord Hervey, _The Difference
Between Verbal and Practical Virtue_ (1742).


1967-1968

129. Lawrence Echard, Prefaces to _Terence's Comedies_ (1694) and
_Plautus's Comedies_ (1694).


1968-1969

133. John Courtenay, _A Poetical Review of the Literary and Moral
Character of the Late Samuel Johnson_ (1786).

134. John Downes, _Roscius Anglicanus_ (1708).

135. Sir John Hill, _Hypochondriasis, a Practical Treatise_ (1766).

136. Thomas Sheridan, _Discourse ... Being Introductory to His Course of
Lectures on Elocution and the English Language_ (1759).

137. Arthur Murphy, _The Englishman From Paris_ (1736).


1969-1970

138. [Catherine Trotter], _Olinda's Adventures_ (1718).

139. John Ogilvie, _An Essay on the Lyric Poetry of the Ancients_
(1762).

140. _A Learned Dissertation on Dumpling_ (1726) and _Pudding Burnt to
Pot or a Compleat Key to the Dissertation on Dumpling_ (1727).

141. Selections from Sir Roger L'Estrange's _Observator_ (1681-1687).

142. Anthony Collins, _A Discourse Concerning Ridicule and Irony in
Writing_ (1729).

143. _A Letter From A Clergyman to His Friend, With An Account of the
Travels of Captain Lemuel Gulliver_ (1726).

144. _The Art of Architecture, A Poem. In Imitation of Horace's Art of
Poetry_ (1742).


1970-1971

145-146. Thomas Shelton, _A Tutor to Tachygraphy, or Short-writing_
(1642) and _Tachygraphy_ (1647).

147-148. _Deformities of Dr. Samuel Johnson_ (1782).

149. _Poeta de Tristibus: or the Poet's Complaint_ (1682).

150. Gerard Langbaine, _Momus Triumphans: or the Plagiaries of the
English Stage_ (1687).


1971-1972

151-152. Evan Lloyd, _The Methodist._ A Poem (1766).

153. _Are these Things So?_ (1740), and _The Great Man's Answer to Are
these Things So?_ (1740).

154. Arbuthnotiana: _The Story of the St. Alb-ns Ghost_ (1712), and _A
Catalogue of Dr. Arbuthnot's Library_ (1779).

155-156. A Selection of Emblems from Herman Hugo's _Pia Desideria_
(1624), with English Adaptations by Francis Quarles and Edmund Arwaker.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Case of Mrs. Clive, by Catherine Clive

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CASE OF MRS. CLIVE ***

***** This file should be named 13881-0.txt or 13881-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/8/8/13881/

Produced by David Starner, Susan Skinner and the PG Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
