The Project Gutenberg EBook of Stories of Boys and Girls Who Loved the
Saviour, by John Wesley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Stories of Boys and Girls Who Loved the Saviour
       A Token for Children

Author: John Wesley

Release Date: December 10, 2009 [EBook #30645]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STORIES OF BOYS AND GIRLS ***




Produced by Michael Gray




[Image: Sarah's Death Bed]
SARAH'S DEATH BED



STORIES

OF

BOYS AND GIRLS

WHO

LOVED THE SAVIOUR


A Token for Children


EXTRACTED FROM A LATE AUTHOR,
By John Wesley, A.M.


New York:
PUBLISHED BY CARLTON & PORTER,
SUNDAY-SCHOOL UNION, 200 MULBERRY STREET.


CONTENTS
---
LITTLE SARAH HOWLEY
A HAPPY BOY
HAPPY MARY
PRAYING CHARLIE
A POOR BUT HAPPY BOY
A BABE IN CHRIST
THE MINISTER'S DAUGHTER
LITTLE JACOB'S FAITH
JACOB'S SISTER SUSANNAH
THE MERCHANT'S SON
PIOUS LITTLE PETER
THE DUTIFUL DAUGHTER



A TOKEN FOR CHILDREN.
---
LITTLE SARAH HOWLEY.

MISS SARAH HOWLEY, when she was between eight and nine years old, was
carried by her friends to hear a sermon, where the minister preached
upon Matt. xi, 30, "My yoke is easy, and my burden is light;" in the
applying of which scripture the child was mightily awakened, and made
deeply sensible of the condition of her soul, and her need of Christ:
she wept bitterly to think what a case she was in; went home, retired
into a chamber, and upon her knees she wept and cried to the Lord as
well as she could, which might easily be perceived by her eyes and
countenance.

2. She was not contented with this, but got her little brother and
sister into a chamber with her, and told them their condition by nature,
and wept over them, and prayed with them.

3. After this, she heard another sermon upon Prov. xxix, 15 "He that,
being often reproved, hardeneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed,
and that without remedy;" at which she was more affected than before,
and was so exceedingly solicitous about her soul, that she spent great
part of the night in weeping and praying, and could scarcely take any
rest, day nor night, for some time together; desiring with all her soul
to escape from everlasting flames, and to get an interest in the Lord
Jesus: O what should she do for Christ! what should she do to be saved!

4. She gave herself much to attending upon the word preached, and still
continued very tender under it, greatly relishing what she heard.

5. She was very much in secret prayer, and was usually very importunate,
and full of tears.

6. She could scarcely speak of sin, or be spoken to, but her heart was
ready to melt.

7. She spent much time in reading the Scripture.

8. She was exceedingly dutiful to her parents, very loath to grieve them
in the least: and if she had at any time (which was very rare) offended
them, she would weep bitterly.

9. She abhorred lying, and allowed herself in no known sin.

10. When she was at school, she was eminent for her diligence,
teachableness, meekness, and modesty, speaking little, but when she did
speak, it was usually spiritual.

11. She continued in this course of religious duties for some years
together.

12. When she was about fourteen years old, she broke a vein in her
lungs, (as is supposed,) and often spat blood, yet did a little recover.

13. In the beginning of January, she was taken very bad again, in which
sickness she was in great distress of soul. When she was first taken,
she said, "O mother, pray for me, for Satan is so busy that I cannot
pray for myself; I see I am undone without Christ, and a pardon! O, I am
undone to all eternity!"

14. Her mother, knowing how serious she had been formerly, did a little
wonder that she should be in such agonies; and asked her what sin it was
that was so burdensome to her spirit? "O mother," said she, "it is not
any particular sin that sticks so close to my conscience, as the sin of
my nature: without the blood of Christ that will damn me."

15. Her mother asked her what she should pray for, for her? She
answered, "That I may have a saving knowledge of Jesus Christ; and that
I may have an assurance of God's love to my soul." Her mother asked her
why she spoke so little to the minister that came to her? She answered,
"It was her duty with patience and silence to learn of him."

16. One time when she fell into a fit, she cried out, "O I am going; I
am going: but what shall I do to be saved? Lord Jesus, I will lie at thy
feet; and if I perish, it shall be at the fountain of thy mercy."

17. She was much afraid of presumption, and dreaded a mistake in the
matters of her soul, and would be often putting up ejaculations to God,
to deliver her from deceiving herself. To instance in one, "Great and
mighty God," said she, "let my faith be a true faith; that I may not be
a foolish virgin, having a lamp, but no oil."

18. Her father bade her be of good cheer, because she was going to a
better Father; at which she fell into a great agony, and said, "But how
do I know that? I am a poor sinner, who wants assurance; O for
assurance!"

This was her great, earnest, and constant request to all who came to
her, to beg assurance for her; and she would look with so much eagerness
upon them, as if she desired nothing in the world so much as that they
would pity her, and help her with their prayers. Never was a poor
creature more earnest for any thing than she was for assurance and the
light of God's countenance. O the piteous moan that she would make! O
the agony that her soul was in!

19. The Lord's day before that on which she died, a kinsman of hers came
to see her, and asked her whether she knew him? She answered, "Yes, I
know you, and I desire you would learn to know Christ. You are young,
but you know not how soon you may die! and, O, to die without Christ is
a fearful thing! O, redeem time! O, time, time, precious time!" Being
requested by him not to spend herself, she said, "She would fain do all
the good she could while she lived;" upon which account she desired that
a sermon might be preached at her funeral, concerning the preciousness
of time.

20. Some ministers who came to see her earnestly entreated the Lord to
give her some token for good, that she might die in full triumph: notes
of the same nature were sent to several churches.

21. After she had long waited for an answer to their prayers, she said,
"Well, I will venture my soul upon Christ."

22. Considering the pains and agonies that she was in, her patience was
next to a wonder: "Lord," said she, "Lord, give me patience, that I may
not dishonour thee!"

23. On Thursday, after long waiting, great fears, and many prayers, when
all her friends thought she had been past speaking, to the astonishment
of her friends, she broke forth thus, with a very audible voice, and
cheerful countenance: "Lord, thou hast promised that whosoever come unto
thee thou wilt in no wise cast them out: Lord, I come unto thee, and
surely thou wilt in no wise cast me out; O, so precious! O, so glorious
is Jesus! I have thee! Blessed and glorious is Jesus; he is precious, he
is precious! O, the admirable love of God in sending Christ and free
grace to a poor lost creature!"

24. Her soul then seemed ravished with the love of Christ. And while she
was engaged in magnifying of God, her father, brothers, and sisters,
with others of the family, were called, to whom she spake particularly
as her strength would give leave. She gave her Bible as a legacy to one
of her brothers, and desired him to use that well for her sake; and
added, to him and the rest, "O make use of time to get Christ for your
souls: spend no time in running up and down, or in playing: O get Christ
for your souls while you are young! Remember now your Creator before you
come to a sick bed: put not off this great work till then, for then you
will find it hard work indeed: I know by experience the devil will tell
you it is time enough; and you are young, and what need you be in such
haste? you will have time enough when you are old. But remember the
words of a dying sister. If you knew how good Christ is! if you had but
one taste of his sweetness, you had rather go to him a thousand times
than stay in this wicked world. I would not for ten thousand worlds part
with my interest in Christ. O, how happy am I that I am going to
everlasting joys! I would not go back again for twenty thousand worlds;
and will you not strive to get an interest in Christ?"

25. After this, looking upon one of her father's servants, she said,
"What shall I do at the great day, when Christ shall say to me, 'Come,
thou blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for thee?' and
shall say to the wicked, 'Go, thou cursed, into the lake that burns for
ever!' What a grief is it for me to think that I should see any of my
friends that I knew upon earth, turned into that lake which burns for
ever! O that word, for ever! Remember that for ever! I speak these words
to you, but they are nothing except God speaks to you too: O pray that
God would give you grace!" And then she prayed, "O Lord, finish thy work
upon their souls: it will be my comfort to see you in glory; but it will
be your everlasting happiness."

26. On Friday, after she had had such lively discoveries of God's love,
she was exceedingly desirous to die, and cried out, "Come, Lord Jesus,
come quickly! Conduct me to thy tabernacle. I am a poor creature without
thee; but, Lord Jesus, my soul longs to be with thee: O when shall it
be? Why not now, blessed Jesus? Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly! But why
do I thus speak? Thy time, my Lord, is the best: O, give me patience."

27. On Saturday she spoke but little, being very drowsy, yet now and
then she dropped these words, "How long, O blessed Jesus? Finish thy
work, holy Jesus: come away, Lord Jesus, come quickly!"

28. On the Lord's day she scarcely spoke any thing. She requested that
notes of thanksgiving might be sent to those who had formerly prayed for
her, that they might help her to praise the Lord for that full assurance
which he had given her of his love; and seemed to be swallowed up with
the thoughts of God's free love to her soul. She often commended her
spirit into the hand of the Lord. The last words she was heard to utter
were these, "Lord, help, Lord Jesus, help! my Lord Jesus, blessed
Jesus!" Thus on the Lord's day, between nine and ten o'clock in the
evening, she sweetly slept in Jesus, and began an everlasting Sabbath,
February 19, 1670.



A HAPPY BOY.

A LITTLE CHILD whose mother had dedicated him to the Lord in infancy,
when he could not speak plain would be crying after God, and was greatly
desirous to be taught good things.

2. He could not endure to be put to bed without prayer, but would put
his parents upon it, with much devotion kneel down, and with great
patience and delight continue till it was concluded, without the least
sign of being weary. He seemed never so well pleased as when so engaged.

3. He could not be satisfied with family prayer, but he would often be
upon his knees by himself in one corner or another.

4. He was much delighted in hearing the word of God either read or
preached.

5. He loved to go to school, that he might learn something of God, and
would take great notice of what he had read, and come home and speak of
it with much affection. He would rejoice in his book, and say to his
mother, "O mother, I had a sweet lesson to-day: will you please to give
me leave to fetch my book, that you may hear it?"

6. He quickly learned to read the Scripture, and would, with great
reverence, tenderness, and groans, read till tears and sobs were ready
to hinder him.

7. When he was at secret prayer he would weep bitterly.

8. He was wont often to complain of the wickedness of his heart, and
seemed to be more grieved for the corruption of his nature, than, for
actual sin.

9. He was much troubled for the wandering of his thoughts in prayer, and
that he could not always keep his heart fixed upon God, and his
affections more constantly raised.

10. He kept a watch over his heart, and observed the workings of his
soul, and would complain that they were so vain and foolish, and so
little busied about spiritual things.

11. He was exceedingly importunate with God in prayer, and would plead
with God at an unusual rate; and he would beg and expostulate, and weep
so, that sometimes it could not be kept from the ears of the neighbours:
so that one in the next house was forced to cry out, "The prayers and
tears of that child in the next house will sink me to hell!" because by
it he did condemn his neglect of prayer and his slight performance of
it.

12. He abhorred lying with all his soul.

13. When he had committed any sin, he was easily convinced of it, and
would get into some corner, or secret place, and with tears beg pardon
of God, and strength to guard against it.

14. When other children were at play, he would be praying.

15. A friend of his asked him, when he was first taken sick, whether he
was not willing to die? He answered, No! because he was afraid of his
state as to another world. "Why, child," said the other, "thou didst
pray for a new heart, for an humble and sincere heart, and I have heard
thee: didst thou not pray with thy heart?" "I hope I did," rejoined he.

16. Not long after, the same person asked him again, "If he was willing
to die?" He answered, "Now I am willing, for I shall go to Christ."

17. He still grew weaker and weaker, but behaved with a great deal of
sweetness and patience, waiting for his change. At last, calling upon
the name of the Lord, and saying, "Lord Jesus, Lord Jesus!" he sweetly
slept, dying when he was between five and six years old.



HAPPY MARY.

MARY A., when she was between four and five years old, was greatly
affected in hearing the word of God, and became very solicitous about
her soul, weeping bitterly to think what would become of her in another
world, asking strange questions concerning God, and Christ, and her own
soul. So that before she was full five years old, she minded the one
thing needful, and chose the better part.

2. She was wont to be much in secret prayer, and many times came from
her knees with tears.

3. She would choose such times and places for secret prayer as might
render her less observed by others: and endeavoured to conceal what she
was doing when she was engaged therein.

4. Her mother being full of sorrow after the death of her husband, this
child came to her and asked her why she wept so exceedingly? Her mother
answered that she had cause enough to weep, because her father was dead.
"No, dear mother," said the child, "you have no cause to weep so much,
for God is a good God still."

5. She was a dear lover of faithful ministers. One time after she had
been hearing Mr. Whitaker, she said, "I love that man dearly for the
sweet words he speaks concerning Christ."

6. Her book was her delight; and many times she was so strangely
affected in reading the Scriptures, that she burst out into tears, and
would hardly be pacified: so greatly was she taken with Christ's
sufferings, the zeal of God's servants, and the danger of a natural
state.

7. She often complained of the corruption of her nature, of the hardness
of her heart, that she could repent no more, and be no more humble and
grieved for her sins against a good God; and when she thus complained,
it was with abundance of tears.

8. She was very conscientious in keeping the Sabbath, spending the whole
time in reading or praying, learning her catechism, or teaching her
brothers and sisters. One time when she was left at home on the Lord's
day, she got some other little children together, with her brothers and
sisters, and told them that it was the Lord's day, and they ought to
remember it to keep it holy. She then told them it was to be spent in
religious exercises all the day, except so much as was taken up in the
works of necessity and mercy: then she prayed with them, and among other
things begged that the Lord would give grace and wisdom to them, (little
children,) that they might know how to serve him.

9. At another time a near relation of hers being in some straits, made
some complaint, to whom she said, "I have heard Mr. Garter say, 'A man
may go to heaven without a penny in his purse, but not without grace in
his heart.'"

10. She had an extraordinary love to the people of God: and when she saw
any who she thought feared the Lord, her heart would even leap for joy.

11. When she was between eleven and twelve years old, she sickened of
the plague, in which she behaved with admirable patience and sweetness,
and did what she could with Scripture arguments to support and encourage
her relations to part with her, who was going to glory, and to prepare
themselves to meet her in a blessed eternity.

12. She was not many days sick before she was marked with the complaint
which she first saw herself, and was greatly rejoiced to think that she
was marked out for the Lord, and was now going apace to Christ. She
called to her friends and said, "I am marked, but be not troubled, for I
know I am marked for one of the Lord's own." One asked her how she knew
that? She answered, "The Lord hath told me that I am one of his dear
children." And this she spoke with a holy confidence in the Lord's love,
and was not in the least daunted at the approach of death; but seemed
greatly delighted in the apprehension of her nearness to her Father's
house. And it was not long before she was filled with joy unspeakable in
believing.

13. When she lay dying, her mother came to her, and told her she was
sorry she had so frequently reproved and corrected so good a child; "O
mother," said she, "speak not thus: I bless God, now I am dying, for
your reproofs and corrections too: for, it may be, I might have gone to
hell, if it had not been for your reproofs and corrections."

14. Some of the neighbours came to visit her, and asked her if she could
leave them. She answered, "If you serve the Lord, you will come after me
to glory."

15. A little before she died, she had a great conflict with Satan, and
cried out, "I am none of his." Her mother seeing her troubled, asked her
what was the matter? She answered, "Satan did trouble me, but now, I
thank God, all is well. I know I am none of his, but Christ's."

16. After this she had a great sense of God's love, and a glorious
sight, as if she had seen the very heavens open, and the angels coming
to receive her; by which her heart was filled with joy, and her tongue
with praise.

17. Being desired by the bystanders to give them a particular account of
what she saw, she answered, "You shall know hereafter:" and so in an
ecstasy of joy and triumph, she went to God when she was about twelve
years old.



PRAYING CHARLIE.

CHARLES BRIDGEMAN had no sooner learned to speak, but he betook himself
to prayer.

2. He was very prone to learn the things of God.

3. He would be sometimes teaching those persons that waited upon him
their duty.

4. He learned by heart many good things before he was well fit to go to
school. And when he was sent to school, he carried it so that all that
observed him, either did or might admire him. O, the sweet temper, the
good disposition, the sincere religion which was in the child!

5. When he was at school what was it that he desired to learn but Christ
and him crucified?

6. So religious and savoury were his words, his actions so upright, his
devotions so hearty, his fear of God so great, that many were ready to
say as they did of John,--What manner of child shall this be?

7. He would be much in reading the Holy, Scriptures.

8. He was desirous of more spiritual knowledge, and would be oft asking
very serious and admirable questions.

9. He would not stir out of doors before he had poured out his soul to
the Lord in prayer.

10. When he ate any thing, he would be sure to lift up his heart unto
the Lord for a blessing upon it; and when he had moderately refreshed
himself by eating, he would not forget to acknowledge God's goodness in
feeding him.

11. He would not lie down in his bed till he had been upon his knees;
and when sometimes he had forgotten his duty, he would quickly get out
of his bed, and kneeling down upon his bare knees, ask God's forgiveness
of that sin.

12. He would rebuke his brethren, if they were at any time too hasty at
their meals, and did eat without asking a blessing; his check was this:
"Dare you do thus? God be merciful to us! this bit of bread might choke
us."

13. His sentences were wise and weighty, and might well become some
ancient Christian.

14. His sickness was a lingering disease: against which, to comfort him,
one tells him of possessions that must fall to his portion; "And what
are they?" said he, "I had rather have the kingdom of heaven than a
thousand such inheritances."

15. When he was sick he seemed much taken up with heaven, and asked very
serious questions about the nature of the soul.

16. After he was pretty well satisfied about that, he inquired how his
soul might be saved? The answer being made, "By the applying of Christ's
merit by faith:" he was pleased with the answer, and was ready to give
any one that should desire it an account of his hope.

17. Being asked whether he had rather live or die? he answered, "I
desire to die, that I may go to my Saviour."

18. His pains increasing upon him, one asked him whether he would rather
still endure those pains or forsake Christ? "Alas!" said he, "I know not
what to say, being a child: for these pains may stagger a strong man;
but I will strive to endure the best I can." Upon this he called to mind
that martyr, _Thomas Bilney_, who, being in prison the night before his
burning, put his finger into the candle to know how he could endure the
fire; "O," said the child, "had I lived then, I would have run through
the fire to have gone to Christ."

19. His sickness lasted long: and at least three days before his death
he prophesied his departure, and not only that he must die, but the very
day. "On the Lord's day," said he, "look to me;" neither was this a word
of course, which you may guess by his frequent repetition, every day
asking till the day came indeed, "What, is Sunday come?" At last, the
looked-for day came on; and no sooner had the sun beautified that
morning with its light, but he falls into a trance, his eyes were fixed,
his face cheerful, his lips smiling, his hands and arms clasped in a
bow, as if he would have embraced some blessed angel that was at hand to
receive his soul. But he comes to himself, and tells them how he saw the
sweetest body that ever eyes beheld, who bid him to be of good cheer,
for he must presently go with him.

20. One that stood near him, as now suspecting the time of his
dissolution nigh, bid him say, "Lord, into thy hands I commend my
spirit, which is thy due; for why? thou hast redeemed it, O Lord, my
God, most true!"

21. The last words which he spoke were exactly these: "Pray, pray, pray,
nay, yet pray, and the more prayers the better all prospers; God is the
best physician; into thy hands I commend my spirit. O Lord Jesus receive
my soul: now close mine eyes: forgive me, father, mother, brother,
sister, all the world. Now I am well; my pain is almost gone, my joy is
at hand. Lord, have mercy on me. O Lord, receive my soul unto thee." And
thus he yielded up his spirit unto the Lord when he was about twelve
years old.



A POOR BUT HAPPY BOY.

A VERY poor child, of the parish of Newington-Butts, came to the door of
a friend of mine, in a very lamentable case: it pleased God to raise in
the heart of my friend a great pity and tenderness toward him: so that
he took him out of the streets, who had nothing at all to commend him to
any one's charity but his misery. My friend, seeking the glory of God,
discharged the parish of the child, and took him as his own; yet there
seemed to be little hopes of doing good upon him, for he was a very
monster of wickedness, and a thousand times more miserable and vile by
his sin than by his poverty. He was running to hell as fast as he could
go, and was old in vice when he was but young in years: we scarcely hear
of one so like the devil in his infancy as was this poor child. What sin
was there that his age was capable of, which he did not commit? What by
the corruption of his nature, and the abominable example of little
beggar boys, he was indeed arrived at a great pitch of impiety. He would
call names, take God's name in vain, curse, swear, and do all kinds of
mischief; and as to any thing of God, he was worse than a heathen.

2. No sooner had this good man taken this creature into his house but he
prayed for him, and laboured with all his might to convince him of his
miserable condition by nature, and to teach him something of God, the
worth of his own soul, and that eternity of glory or misery to which he
was bound. And, blessed be God, it was not long before the Lord was
pleased to let him understand that it was himself who put into his heart
to take in this child. The Lord soon blessed his instructions, so that
an amazing change was seen. In the space of a few weeks he was convinced
of the evil of his ways; no more calling of names, swearing or cursing,
no more taking of the Lord's name in vain. His company, his talk, his
employment, were changed, and he was like another creature.

3. And this change was not only an external one, but he would get by
himself, and weep and mourn bitterly for his wicked life.

4. He was still more and more broken under a sense of his undone state
by nature; often in tears, and bemoaning his lost and miserable
condition. When his master spoke of the things of God, he listened
earnestly, and took in with much eagerness and affection, what he was
taught. There was seldom any discourse about religion in his hearing,
but he heard as though it were for his life.

5. Thus he continued seeking after the knowledge of God, till the
sickness came into the house, with which he was smitten. At his first
sickening the poor child was greatly amazed and afraid; and though his
pains were great, and the distemper very tedious; nevertheless, the
sense of his sins, and the thought of the condition that his soul was
still in, made his trouble ten times greater.

6. He was in grievous agonies of spirit; his former sins stared him in
the face, and made him tremble. The poison of God's arrows did even
drink up his spirits; the sense of sin and of wrath were so great that
he knew not what to do. The weight of God's displeasure, and the thought
of lying under it to all eternity, broke him even to pieces, and he
bitterly cried out, "What shall I do! I am a miserable sinner, and I
fear that I shall go to hell." His sins had been so great and so many,
that there was no hope for him. He was not by far so much concerned for
his life as for his soul: what would become of that for ever. Now the
plague upon his body seemed nothing to that which was in his soul.

7. He not only cried out against his swearing, lying, and other outward
notorious sins; but was in great horror for the sin of his nature; the
vileness and original corruption of his heart. For this he was in so
great anguish that the trouble of his spirit made him forget the pain of
his body.

8. He very particularly confessed and bewailed his sins, and some sins
so secret that none in the world could charge him with.

9. He would ask others whether they thought there were any hopes for
him, and would beg of them to deal plainly with him; for he was greatly
afraid of being deceived.

10. Being informed how willing and ready the Lord Jesus Christ was to
accept of poor sinners, and being counselled to venture himself upon
Christ for mercy and salvation, he said he would fain cast himself upon
Christ, but he could not but wonder how Christ should die for such a
vile wretch as he was, and he found it one of the hardest things in the
world to believe.

11. But at last it pleased the Lord to give him some hope that there
might be mercy for him, the chief of sinners; and he was enabled to lay
hold upon that, "Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and
I will give you rest." Nor was it long before he was full of praise and
admiration of God; so that, to speak in the words of one that was an eye
and ear witness, he was so full of joy and praise that he longed for
heaven.

12. He now grew exceedingly in knowledge, experience, patience,
humility, and self-abhorrence. He prayed before, but now the Lord poured
out upon him the spirit of prayer in an extraordinary manner; so that
now he prayed more frequently, more earnestly, more spiritually than
ever. O how eagerly would he beg to be washed in the blood of Jesus! And
that the King of kings, and Lord of lords, who was over heaven and
earth, would pardon and forgive him all his sins, and receive his soul
into his kingdom. And what he spoke was with so much life and fervour of
spirit, that it filled the hearers with astonishment and joy.

13. He had no small sense of the use and excellence of Christ, and such
longings and breathings of his soul after him, that when mention has
been made of Christ, he hath been ready to leap out of his bed for joy.

14. The Wednesday before he died, he lay in a trance for about half an
hour, in which time he thought he saw a vision of angels. When he was
out of his trance, he asked his nurse why she did not let him go? "Go!
whither?" said she; "Why, along with those lovely gentlemen," said he;
"but they told me they would come and fetch me away upon Friday." And he
repeated these words many times, "Upon Friday next those lovely
gentlemen will come for me."

15. He was very thankful to his master, and very sensible of his great
kindness in taking him out of the streets when begging, and he admired
the goodness of God, which put it into the mind of a stranger: said he,
"I hope to see you in heaven, for I am sure you will go thither. O
blessed, blessed be God, that made you to take pity upon me; for I might
have died, and have gone to the devil, and been damned for ever, if it
had not been for you."

16. The Thursday before he died, he asked a friend of mine what he
thought of his condition, and whither his soul was going? for he said he
could not still but fear, lest he should deceive himself with false
hopes. At which my friend spoke to him thus:--"If thou art but willing
to accept of Christ, thou mayest have Christ, and all that thou dost
want with him. Thou sayest thou fearest that Christ will not accept of
thee! I fear that thou art not heartily willing to accept of him." The
child answered, "Indeed I am." "Why, then, if thou art unfeignedly
willing to have Christ, I tell thee he is a thousand times more willing
to have thee, and wash thee, and save thee. And now at this time, Christ
offers himself to thee again; therefore, receive him humbly by faith
into thy heart, and bid him welcome, for he deserveth it." Upon which
words the Lord discovered his love to the child; and he gave a kind of
leap in his bed, and snapped his finger and thumb together with
abundance of joy. And from that time forward, in full joy and assurance
of God's love, he continued earnestly praising God, desiring to die, and
to be with Christ. And on Friday morning he sweetly went to rest, using
that expression, "Into thy hands, O Lord, I commit my spirit!" being not
much above nine years old.



A BABE IN CHRIST.

JOHN SUDLOW was born of religious parents, in the county of Middlesex,
whose care was to instill spiritual principles into him as soon as he
was capable of understanding them, whose endeavours the Lord was pleased
to crown with the desired success.

2. When he was scarce able to speak plain he seemed to have a very great
awe and reverence of God upon his spirit, and a strange sense of the
things of another world.

3. The first thing that much affected him, and made him endeavour to
escape from the wrath to come, and to inquire what he should do to be
saved, was the death of a little brother. When he saw him without
breath, and not able to speak or stir; and when carried out of doors,
and put into the ground, he was greatly concerned, and asked whether he
should die too? Being answered yes it made so deep an impression on him,
that from that time forward, he was exceedingly serious; and this was
when he was about four years old.

4. He was now desirous to know what he might do that he might live in
another world, and what to avoid, that he might not die for ever. And,
being instructed by his parents, he soon laboured to avoid whatsoever
might displease God. Now the apprehensions of God, death and eternity,
laid such a restraint upon him, that he would not, for a world, have
told a lie. He was much taken with reading the book of martyrs, and
would willingly leave his dinner and go to his book.

5. He went to his father and mother with great tenderness and
compassion, and entreated them to take more care of his brothers and
sisters; and to take heed lest they should go to hell, and be ruined for
ever.

6. The providences of God were not passed by without his minute
observation. In the time of the plague he was exceedingly concerned
about his everlasting state, and was very much by himself upon his
knees. The following prayer was found written in short hand after his
death.

7. O Lord God and merciful Father, take pity upon me, a miserable
sinner: and strengthen me, O Lord, in thy faith, and make me one of thy
saints in heaven. O Lord, keep me from this poisonous infection;
however, not my will, but thy will be done. O Lord, if thou hast
appointed me to die by it, fit me for death, and give me a good heart to
bear up under my afflictions. O Lord God, and merciful Father, take pity
on me, thy child. Teach me, O Lord, thy word; make me strong in faith. O
Lord, I have sinned against thee; Lord, pardon my sins. I had been in
hell long ago if it had not been for thy mercy. But, O Lord, if thou
hast appointed me to die, fit me for death, that I may die with comfort.
And, O Lord, I pray thee to help me to bear up under my afflictions for
Christ's sake. Amen.

8. He was not a little concerned for the whole nation, and begged that
God would pardon the sins of this land, and bring it nearer to himself.

9. About the beginning of November, this child was smote with the
distemper, but he behaved with admirable patience under the hand of God.

10. These were some of his last expressions. "The Lord shall be my
physician, for he will cure both soul and body. Heaven is the best
hospital. It is the Lord, let him do what seemeth good in his eyes."
Again, "It is the Lord that taketh away my health; but I will say as Job
did, 'Blessed be the name of the Lord.' If I should live longer, I
should but sin against God." Looking upon his father, he said, "If the
Lord will but lend me the least finger of his hand to lead me through
the dark entry of death, I will rejoice in him."

11. When a minister came to him, among other things, he spake something
of life. He answered, "This is a wicked world: it is better to live in
heaven."

12. An hour and a half before his death, the same minister came again to
visit him, and asked him, "John, art thou not afraid to die?" He
answered, "No, if the Lord will comfort me in that hour." "But," said
the minister, "how canst thou expect comfort, seeing we deserve none?"
He answered, "No, if I had my deserts, I had been in hell long ago."
"But," replied the minister, "which way dost thou expect comfort and
salvation, seeing that thou art a sinner?" He answered, "In Christ
alone." In whom, about an hour and a half after, he fell asleep.



THE MINISTER'S DAUGHTER.

TABITHA ALDER was the daughter of a minister in Kent, who lived near
Gravesend. She was instructed in the Holy Scriptures by her father and
mother; but there appeared nothing extraordinary in her till she was
between seven and eight years old:

2. About which time, when she was sick, one asked her what she thought
would become of her if she should die? She answered that she was greatly
afraid she should go to hell.

3. Being asked why she was afraid she should go to hell? She answered,
because she did not love God.

4. Again, being asked how she knew that she did not love God? she
replied, "What have I done for God ever since I was born? And beside
this, I have been taught that he that loves God keeps his commandments;
but I have kept none of them."

5. Being farther demanded if she would not fain love God? she answered,
"Yes, with all my heart, if I could, but I find it a hard thing to love
one I do not see."

6. She was advised to beg of God a heart to love him: she answered, "I
am afraid it is too late."

7. Upon this, seeing her in such a desponding condition, a friend of
hers spent the next day in fasting and prayer for her.

8. After this, that friend asked her how she did now? She answered with
a great deal of joy, "Now I bless the Lord; I love the Lord Jesus
dearly; I feel I do love him. O, I love him dearly."

9. "Why," said her friend, "did you not say yesterday you did not love
the Lord, and that you could not?" "Sure," said she, "it was Satan
hindered me. But now I love him. O blessed be God for the Lord Jesus
Christ."

10. After this she had a discovery of her approaching dissolution, which
was no small comfort to her: "Anon," said she, (with a holy triumph,) "I
shall be with Jesus. I am married to him: he is my husband: I am his
bride: I have given myself to him, and he hath given himself to me, and
I shall live with him for ever."

11. This language struck the hearers with astonishment. She still
continued in a kind of ecstasy of joy, admiring the excellence of
Christ, rejoicing in her interest in him, and longing to be with him.

12. After a while, some of her friends, who stood near her, observed a
more than ordinary earnestness and fixedness in her countenance; they
said one to another, "Look how earnestly she looks, surely she sees
something."

13. One asked her what it was that she fixed her eyes upon so eagerly?
"I warrant," says one, "she saw death coming."

14. "No," said she, "it is the glory that I saw, it is that on which my
eyes were fixed."

15. One demanded of her, what the glory was like? She replied, "I cannot
tell what, but I am going to it: will you go with me? I am going to
glory. O that you were all going with me to that glory!" With these
words her soul took wings, and went to the possession of that glory. She
died when she was between eight and nine years of age.



LITTLE JACOB'S FAITH.

JACOB BICKS was born in Leyden, in the year 1657. He was visited with
sickness upon the 6th of August, 1664. In his distemper he was very
sleepy till near his death, but when he did awake he was wont still to
fall a praying.

2. Once when his parents had prayed with him, they asked him if they
should once more send for the physician? "No," said he, "I will have the
doctor no more; the Lord will help me; I know he will take me to
himself."

3. When his parents had prayed with him, he said, "Come, now, dear
father and mother, and kiss me: I know that I shall die. Farewell, dear
father and mother; farewell, dear sister; farewell, all. Now shall I go
unto God and Jesus Christ, and the holy angels. Father, know you not
what is said by Jeremiah? 'Blessed is he who trusteth in the Lord.' Now
I trust in him, and he will bless me; and in 1 John ii, it is said,
'Little children, love not the world, for the world passeth away.'"

4. "Away then all that is in the world, away with all my pleasant things
in the world; away with my dagger, for where I go there is nothing to do
with daggers and swords; men shall not fight there, but praise God. Away
with all my books: there shall I learn true wisdom without books."

5. His father said, "My dear child, the Lord will be near thee, and
uphold thee."

6. "Yea, father," said he, "the Apostle Peter saith, 'God resisteth the
proud, but he giveth grace to the humble.' I humble myself under the
mighty hand of God, and he shall help me and lift me up."

7. "O, my dear child," said his father, "hast thou so strong faith?"

8. "Yes," said he, "God hath given me so strong a faith in himself
through Jesus Christ, that the devil shall flee from me: for it is said,
He who believeth in the Son hath everlasting life, and he hath overcome
the wicked one. Now I believe in Jesus Christ my Redeemer, and he will
not leave nor forsake me, but shall give unto me eternal life, and then
I shall sing, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Sabaoth."

Then, with that word, "Lord, be merciful unto me a poor sinner," he
quietly breathed out his soul, being about seven years old.



JACOB'S SISTER SUSANNAH.

SUSANNAH BICKS, the sister of Jacob Bicks, was born in Leyden, in
Holland, January 24, 1650, of religious parents, whose great care was to
instruct their child, and to present her to the ministers of the place
to be publicly instructed.

2. It pleased God to bless this to her soul, so that she had soon a true
relish for what she was taught, and made an admirable use of it in time
of need.

3. She was a child of great dutifulness to her parents, and of a very
sweet, humble nature; and not only the truth, but the power and eminence
of religion did shine in her.

4. In August, 1664, when the pestilence raged in Holland, as she felt
herself very ill, she broke forth in these words, "If thy law were not
my delight, I should perish in my affliction."

5. Her father coming to her, said, "Be of good comfort, my child, for
the Lord will be near to thee and us: he will not forsake us, though he
chastens." "Yea, father," said she, "our heavenly Father doth chasten us
for our profit, that we may be partakers of his holiness; no
chastisement seemeth for the present to be joyous, but grievous; but
afterward it yields the peaceable fruits of righteousness to them which
are exercised thereby."

6. After this, with her eyes lifted towards heaven, she said, "Be
merciful to me a sinner, according to thy word."

7. She greatly abhorred sin, and, with much grief and self-detestation,
reflected upon it; but that which lay the closest to her heart was the
depravity of her nature. She often cried out in the words of the
psalmist, "Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother
conceive me." She could never lay herself low enough under a sense of
that sin which she brought with her into the world.

8. That scripture dwelt much on her tongue, "The sacrifices of God are a
broken heart; a broken and contrite spirit, O God, thou wilt not
despise." "O for that brokenness of heart," said she, "which flows from
faith, and for that faith which is built upon Christ, who is the alone
and proper sacrifice for sin."

9. Then she discoursed of the nature of faith, and desired that the 11th
of the Hebrews should be read unto her: at the reading of which she
cried out, "O what a steadfast faith was Abraham's, which made him
willing to offer up his own and only son! Faith is indeed the substance
of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen."

10. Her father and mother, seeing her, burst into tears; upon which she
pleaded with them to be patient under the hand of God. "O," said she,
"why do you weep over me, seeing you have no reason to question: but, if
the Lord takes me, it shall be well with me to all eternity? You ought
to be well satisfied, seeing it is said, 'God is in heaven, and doth
whatever pleaseth him.' And do you not pray every day that the will of
God may be done upon earth as it is in heaven? Now, father, this is
God's will, that I should lie upon this sick bed, and die of this
disease; shall we not be content when our prayers are answered? I will,
as long as I live, pray that God's will be done, not mine."

11. "Doth not," said she, "the pestilence come from God? Why else doth
the Scripture say, Shall there be evil in the city which I have not
sent? Does it come from the air? And is not the Lord the Creator and
Ruler of the air? Or if they say it comes from the earth, hath not he
the same power and influence upon that too? What talk they of a ship
that came from Africa? Have you not heard long ago, 'I will bring a
sword upon you, and avenge the quarrel of my covenant, and when you are
assembled in the cities, then I will bring the pestilence into the midst
of you?'"

12. After this, having taken a little rest, she said, "Whether in death
or life, a believer is Christ's, who hath redeemed us by his own
precious blood from the power of the devil; then, whether I live or die,
I am the Lord's. O why do you afflict yourselves thus? But what shall I
say? With weeping I came into the world, and with weeping I must go out
again. O my dear parents, better is the day of my death than the day of
my birth."

13. She then desired her father to pray with her, and to request of the
Lord that she might have a quiet passage into another world.

14. Her father, observing her to grow very weak, said, "I perceive,
child, thou art very weak." "It is true, sir," said she, "I feel my
weakness increasing, and I see your sorrow increasing too, which is a
part of my affliction. Be content, I pray you, it is the Lord who does
it; and let you and I say with David, 'Let us fall into the Lord's hand,
for his mercies are great.'"

15. She laid a great charge upon her parents not to grieve for her after
her death, urging that of David: while the child was sick he fasted and
wept: but when it died he washed his face, and sat up, and ate, and
said, "Can I bring him back from death? I shall go to him, but he shall
not return to me."

16. Being very feeble, she said, "O that I might quietly sleep in the
bosom of Jesus! and that till then he would strengthen me! O that he
would take me in his arms, as he did those little ones, where he said,
'Suffer little children to come unto me, for of such is the kingdom of
heaven: and he took them in his arms, and he laid his hands on them, and
blessed them,' I lie here as a child: O Lord, I am thy child, receive me
into thy gracious arms. O Lord, grace! grace! and not justice! For if
thou shouldst enter into judgment with me, I cannot stand: yea, none
living would be just in thy sight."

17. Then she said, "O what is the life of man! The days of man upon
earth are as grass, and as the flower of the field, so he flourishes:
the wind passeth over it, and it is gone, and his place knows him no
more."

18. She added, "My life shall not continue long. I feel much weakness: O
Lord, look upon me graciously, have pity upon my weak distressed heart.
I am oppressed, undertake for me, that I may stand fast and overcome."

19. She was very frequent in spiritual ejaculations, and it was no small
comfort to her that the Lord Christ prayed for her, and promised to send
his Spirit to comfort her. "It is said," continued she, "'I will pray
the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter.' O let him not
leave me! O Lord, stay with me till my battle and work is finished!"

20. Soon after, she said, "None but Christ; without thee I can do
nothing! Christ is the true vine! O let me be a branch of that vine!
What poor worms are we! O dear father, how lame and halting do we go on
in the ways of God and salvation! We know but in part, but when that
which is perfect is come, then that which is imperfect shall be done
away. O that I had attained to that now! But what are we ourselves? Not
only weakness and nothingness, but wickedness: for the thoughts and
imaginations of a man's heart are only evil, and that continually. We
are by nature children of wrath, and are conceived in sin, and born in
unrighteousness! O this wretched and vile thing, sin! But thanks be to
God, who hath redeemed me from it. O Lord, take me to thyself. Behold,
dear mother, he has prepared a place for me."

21. "Yea, my dear child," said her mother, "He shall strengthen you with
his Holy Spirit until he hath fitted and prepared you fully for that
place which he hath provided for you."

22. "Yea, mother," replied she, "it is said in the 84th Psalm, 'How
lovely are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts! My soul doth thirst and
long for the courts of the Lord: one day in thy courts is better than a
thousand: yea, I had rather be a door-keeper in the house of my God than
dwell in the tents of the wicked.' Read that psalm, dear mother,
wherewith we may comfort each other. As for me, I am more and more
spent, and draw near my last hour."

23. Then she quoted Job's words, "I know that my Redeemer liveth, and
that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth: and though, after
my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God."

24. Then she said, "'Marvel not at this, for the hour is coming in which
all that are in their graves shall hear his voice, and come forth; those
that have done good unto the resurrection of life.' See, father, I shall
rise in that day, and then I shall behold my Redeemer: then will he say,
'Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you
from the beginning of the world.' Behold, now I live, yet not I, but
Christ liveth in me, and the life that I now live in the flesh, is by
faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. I am
saved, and that not of myself, it is the gift of God; not of works, lest
any man should boast."

25. "My dear parents, now we must part, my speech fails me: pray to the
Lord for a quiet close to my combat." Her parents replied, "Ah, dear
child! how sad is that to us, that we must part?" She answered, "I go to
heaven, and there we shall find one another again: I go to Jesus
Christ."

26. Then she comforted herself to think of her precious brother and
sister. "I go to my brother Jacob, who did so much cry and call upon God
to the last moment of his breath: and to my little sister, who was but
three years old when she died: who, when we asked her whether she would
die? answered, 'Yes, if it be the Lord's will.' I will go to my little
brother, if it be the Lord's will, or I will stay with my mother, if it
be his will. But I know that I shall die and go to heaven."

27. After this, her spirit was refreshed with a sense of the pardon of
her sins, which made her to cry out, "Behold, God hath washed away my
sins, O how I do long to die! The Lord is my shepherd: although I pass
through the valley of the shadow of death, I will not fear, for thou art
with me: shall I not suffer, seeing my glorious Redeemer was pleased to
suffer so much for me? O how was he mocked and crowned with thorns, that
he might purchase a crown of righteousness for us! Must I not exalt and
bless him while I have a being, who hath bought me even with his blood!
Behold the Lamb of God, that taketh away the sins of the world! That
Lamb is Jesus Christ, who hath satisfied for my sins.

28. "My end is now very near; now I shall put on the white raiment, and
be clothed before the Lamb, that spotless Lamb, and with his spotless
righteousness. Now are the angels making ready to carry my soul before
the throne of God. 'These are they who have come out of great
tribulation, who have washed their robes, and made them white in the
blood of the Lamb.'" She spoke this with a dying voice, but full of
spirit and of the power of faith.

29. Her lively assurance she farther uttered in the words of the
apostle, "We know that if this earthly house of our tabernacle be
dissolved, we have a building of God, which is eternal in the heavens;
for in this we sigh for our house which is in heaven; that we may be
clothed therewith."

30. "There, father, you see that my body is this tabernacle, which now
shall be broken down; my soul shall now part from it, and shall be taken
up into paradise, into that heavenly Jerusalem. There shall I dwell and
go no more out, but sit and sing, Holy, holy, is the Lord God of hosts,
the Lord of Sabaoth!" Her last words were these: "O Lord God, into thy
hands I commit my spirit: O Lord, be gracious, be merciful to me a poor
sinner."

She died the first of September, 1664, between seven and eight in the
evening; in the fourteenth year of her age.



THE MERCHANT'S SON.

JOHN HARVEY was born in London, in the year 1654: his father was a Dutch
merchant: he was piously educated under his mother, and soon began to
hear Divine things with delight.

2. The first thing observable in him was, that when he was two years and
eight months old, he could speak as well as other children do usually at
five years old.

3. His parents, judging that he was then too young to send to school,
let him have his liberty to play about their yard, but instead of
playing, he found out a school of his own accord near home, and went to
the schoolmistress, and entreated her to teach him to read; and so he
went some time to school without the knowledge of his parents, and made
a very strange progress in his learning, and was able to read distinctly
before most children knew their letters.

4. He was wont to ask many serious and weighty questions about matters
which concerned his soul and eternity.

5. His mother being greatly troubled upon the death of one of his
uncles, this child came to his mother and said, "Mother, though my uncle
be dead, do not the Scriptures say he must rise again? Yes, and I must
die, and so must every body, and it will not be long before Christ will
come to judge the world, and then we shall see one another again: I pray
mother, do not weep so much." He was not then quite five years old: by
which her sorrow for her brother was turned into admiration, and she was
made to sit silent and quiet under that trying providence.

6. After this his parents removed to Aberdeen, and settled their child
under a schoolmaster there, whose custom was upon the Lord's day in the
morning, to examine his scholars concerning the sermons they had heard
the former Lord's day, and to add some other questions, which might try
the understanding and knowledge of his scholars. The question that was
once proposed to his form was, whether Christ had a mother? None of the
scholars could answer it, till it came to John Harvey, who, being asked
whether Christ had a mother? answered, "No; as he was God he could not
have a mother; but as he was man he had." This was before he was six
years old.

7. One day, seeing one of his near relations come into his father's
house distempered with drink, he went to him, and wept over him, and
besought him that he would not so offend God, and hazard his soul.

8. He was a conscientious observer of the Lord's day, spending all the
time either in secret prayer, reading the Scriptures and good books,
learning his catechism, or hearing the word of God. And he was not only
careful in the performance of these duties himself, but was ready to put
all that he knew upon a strict observation of the Lord's day.

9. He was very humble and modest, and hated any thing more than
necessaries, either in clothes or diet.

10. When he perceived either his brother or sister pleased with their
new clothes, he would reprove their folly; and when his reproof
signified little, he would bewail their vanity.

11. Once he had a new suit brought from the tailor's, which, when he
looked on, he found some ribands on the knees, at which he was grieved:
asking his mother "whether these things would keep him warm?" "No,
child," said his mother. "Why then," said he, "do you suffer them to be
put there? You are mistaken if you think such things please me: and, I
doubt some that are better than us may want the money that this cost
you, to buy them bread."

12. At leisure times he was talking to his school fellows about the
things of God, and the necessity of a holy life. That text he much spoke
on to them, "The axe is laid to the root of the tree, and every tree
that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire."

13. After this his parents removed not far from London, where he
continued till the year 1665. He was then sent to the Latin school,
where he soon made a very considerable progress, and was greatly beloved
of his master. The school was his beloved place, and learning his
recreation.

14. He had a word to say to every one that he conversed with, to put
them in mind of the worth of Christ and their souls; and their nearness
to eternity: insomuch that good people took no small pleasure in his
company.

15. He bewailed the miserable condition of the generality of mankind,
(when he was about ten years old,) that they were utterly estranged from
God. "Though they called him Father, he said, yet they were his children
by creation, and not by any likeness they had to God, or any interest in
him."

16. Thus he continued walking in the ways of God: in reading, praying,
hearing the word of God, and spiritual intercourse; discovering thereby
his serious thoughts of eternity, which seemed to swallow up all other
thoughts; and he lived in a constant preparation for it, and looked more
like one that was ripe for glory than an inhabitant of this lower world.

17. When he was about eleven years and nine months old his mother's
house was visited with the plague; his eldest sister was the first that
was visited with this distemper; and when they were praying for her, he
would sob and weep bitterly.

18. As soon as he perceived his sister was dead, he said, "The will of
the Lord be done, blessed be the Lord! Dear mother, you must do as David
did: after the child was dead he went and refreshed himself, and quietly
submitted to the will of God."

19. The rest of the family held well for some days, which time he spent
in preparing for death. Meantime he wrote several meditations upon
different subjects, particularly upon the excellence of Christ. He was
never well but when he was more immediately engaged in the service of
God.

20. At the end of fourteen days he was taken sick, at which he seemed
very cheerful; though his pains were great.

21. His mother, looking upon his brother, shook her head: at which he
asked if his brother was marked with the complaint? She answered, "Yea,
child." He asked again whether he was marked? She answered nothing.
"Well," says he, "I know I shall be marked: I pray let me have Mr.
Baxter's book, that I may read a little more of eternity before I go
into it." His mother told him he was not able to read. He said, "Then
pray by me and for me."

22. His mother asked him whether he was willing to die and leave her? He
answered, "Yes. I am willing to leave you and go to my heavenly Father."
She answered, "Child, if thou hadst but an assurance of God's love, I
should not be so much troubled." He answered, "I am assured that my sins
are forgiven, and that I shall go to heaven: for," said he, "here stood
an angel by me, that told me I should quickly be in glory."

23. At this his mother burst forth into tears. "O mother," said he, "did
you but know what joy I feel you would not weep but rejoice. I tell you
I am so full of comfort that I cannot tell you how I am: O mother, I
shall presently have my head in my Father's bosom, and shall be there
where the four and twenty elders cast down their crowns, and sing
hallelujah, glory, and praise to him that sits upon the throne, and to
the Lamb for ever!"

24. Upon this his speech began to fail him, but his soul was still taken
up with glory; and nothing now grieved him but the sorrow that he saw
his mother to be in for his death; a little to divert her he asked,
"What she had for supper?" But presently, in a kind of rapture he cried,
"O what a sweet supper have I making ready for me in glory!"

25. But seeing all this did but increase his mother's grief, he asked
her, "What she meant thus to offend God? Know you not that it is the
hand of the Almighty? 'Humble yourself under the mighty hand of God:'
lay yourself in the dust and kiss the rod, in token of your submission
to the will of God." Upon which, raising himself a little, he gave a
lowly bow, and spake no more! but went to rest in the bosom of Jesus.



PIOUS LITTLE PETER.

PETER MELVILLE, from the commencement of his illness, received much
satisfaction from reading the Bible and other serious books; and after
the first month or six weeks, was not known to read any other. The short
history of Jesus Christ, by Mason, afforded him great satisfaction. In
prayer he joined most heartily, and his eyes, while his friends were
engaged in this exercise, were always raised toward heaven. During his
painful illness, which lasted four months, he was remarkably patient,
and much distressed at the idea of giving trouble. From these
circumstances it was concluded that his mind was seriously disposed.
Fourteen days, however, before his death, being much worse and unable to
leave his bed, his anxious parents, desirous to know his real state,
asked him if his mind was easy? At first he appeared inclined to evade
the question; but the question being repeated he burst into tears and
cried out, "I have been a very great sinner, I do not feel a love for my
Saviour, nor see him with an eye of faith." Different texts of Scripture
were mentioned which directed him to cast all his care on the Lord.
These appeared to comfort him in a degree, and he then said, "What a
charming place heaven is." It being observed that great advantages
frequently resulted from a long illness, he expressed his sense of it by
exclaiming, "What a dreadful place must I have gone to had I been cut
off at once."

The next morning he was asked if he wished to converse with a minister?
on his answering in the affirmative, the Rev. Mr. W. was requested to
visit him; and was the instrument, in the hands of God, of composing his
mind. The next day he requested that Watts' Psalms and Hymns, which he
was very fond of reading, might be brought to him; and when his father
came to his bedside he pointed to the 23d psalm, and asked if it was not
a very sweet one?

On Saturday following he expressed a wish to have a Bible and prayer
book purchased for him, in which, together with his hymn book, he wrote
his name.

On Thursday, the 7th of April, being much worse, he was again asked if
his mind was comfortable, to which he replied, "No; I am the greatest of
sinners, and Satan tempts me to sin." Everything was said that could be
thought of to compose him, and soon after he became more tranquil, and
appeared delighted with the idea of heaven, requesting to have a
description of that blessed place read to him. This had been done some
time before, and had made a lasting impression on his mind. But when he
made the request he added in a low voice, "I am afraid I shall never get
there, because I do not love my Saviour as I ought." Being asked again
how he found his mind, he answered, "A little better; but I wish to love
my Lord and Saviour; and I hope to be able to do it more and more."

On being reminded that it was Good Friday, he talked much of our Lord's
great sufferings for his people; and while speaking of the blessed Lamb
that had been crucified on that day, he desired the 25th hymn of the
third book of Watts to be read to him.

       "All mortal vanities, begone."

On the evening of this day he appeared to feel much of what had been
said to him by the Rev. Mr. H., who had visited him frequently.

Saturday night was spent in great pain--he had but few intervals of
ease. When he was told "such things were from the Lord," he replied,
"The Lord is good, yes, the Lord is good to them who put their trust in
him." When he expressed his gratitude to his weeping parents for their
attention to him, and his mother had told him that it was the Lord who
enabled them to do any thing for him, and mentioned his glorious Saviour
as the blessed object of all his gratitude, he turned his thoughts to
heaven and said, "Then I hope to love him now; and what rapture will it
afford me to meet all my dear friends with him in glory." He spoke for
some time on the subject with great energy; and on being told that he
would fatigue himself, he replied, "It is not fatiguing, it is
rapturous;" and particularly expressed a hope that not one of his family
would be _wanting;_ adding, "What a disappointment shall I feel if you
are not there." He seemed much refreshed by this conversation, and went
to sleep with a sweet smile on his countenance.

In the afternoon he was still more composed, and told his mother he
would talk a little; when he again dwelt most sweetly on the goodness of
the Lord to his soul, and the happiness of meeting his parents and
friends in glory. In the night, being asked if he did not love the
sinner's friend, he replied, "I wish to do it, and in heaven I shall do
it more," adding, "No one ever loved him one part in a thousand so much
as they ought to do." He frequently prayed for patience, being subject
to great pain. Seeing his mother weep, he asked her why she cried. She
replied, "That she could not help it." "I hope," said he, "the Lord will
give you strength."

On the Monday, being again frequently asked if Jesus was precious, he at
times nodded his head, and at others said, "I hope he is, and that he
will be more so by and by." But soon after that he said, "I am a great
sinner, and am afraid I shall be disappointed in all my hopes of
heaven." But being exhorted to cast all his unbelieving thoughts away,
and put his entire trust in his blessed Redeemer, whose arms were
underneath him, he replied, "Then I am safe." Again he thanked his
parents for their care of him, and when it was repeated that it was all
the Lord's doing, "Then," said he, "you are the instruments, and what a
blessed thing it is to have parents who guide and instruct us in the
way;" and added, "O what will become of those children who idle about on
the Sabbath day, who swear and steal. O shocking! shocking! O what a
blessing to have good parents." On requesting to see his brothers, they
came to him; and taking them by the hand, he asked them how they did. To
his little brother Henry he said, "Be a good boy, do not run about with
idle children, and tell Philip what I say, learn your catechism, also
read your Bible." Perceiving that his eldest brother cried, he said,
"Why is John weeping? Weep not for me, weep for yourselves." "What a
blessed change," said a friend, "will it be, from such a sick bed as
this to the joys of heaven!" to which he added, "To be in the arms of my
Redeemer, to see him face to face, and behold his glories in heaven: O
how admirable! O what are the glories of an earthly kingdom when
compared to this: but as the drop of a bucket to the ocean; yea, no
mortal can describe the joys of heaven." When he again sweetly dwelt on
the happiness of meeting all his friends there, "Where," said he, "we
shall meet to part no more for ever; and there shall be no more death;"
which he twice repeated. In the night he was much buffeted by Satan.
About four o'clock in the morning, he appeared to be dying, and in a low
voice, said, "May you all keep the commandments, and love God evermore.
Weep not for me, I am not worth weeping for." Being in an agony of pain
he was directed to the source of all good. Soon after he appeared
easier, and said, "Truly the heart is willing, but the flesh is weak,
and if the heart is willing, never mind the voice." Being reminded of
the joy he would feel at hearing his Lord say, "Well done, good and
faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord;" he exclaimed,
"Amen, so be it," and spoke no more. "Great are the troubles of the
righteous, but the Lord delivereth out of them all," was the last text
repeated to him, to which he nodded his head, and then calmly fell
asleep in Jesus, aged twelve years and three months.

     Farewell, dear babe, with all thy sacred store,
     In triumph landed on the heavenly shore;
     Sure nature form'd thee in her softest mould,
     And grace, from nature's dross, refund the gold.



THE DUTIFUL DAUGHTER.

ELIZABETH W. ORCHARD was born March 6, 1795, at Melksham, in Wiltshire;
and from an early age was very dutiful to her parents, and much attached
to her school and books. In 1802 her father removed from Newport, in the
Isle of Wight, to Bath; where he and his family attended the Rev. Mr.
J.'s chapel. Soon after their arrival at Bath, Elizabeth and William her
brother were admitted into the Sunday school belonging to Argyle chapel;
from the time of Elizabeth's admittance, she seemed to read her books
with understanding and profit; and during the week, it was always her
study to get her task by heart against the returning Sabbath. Her
partiality for her teachers was great: especially for Miss S., whom,
when she was taken ill, she longed to see. The tickets that were given
to her in the school, as tokens for good, she valued much; and expressed
a wish to return them, that she might obtain a hymn book, the reward she
was entitled to. A shilling that was given to her by the committee at
Christmas, for learning her book, with one that she had borrowed of her
brother, she laid out in the purchase of a Testament; which she
preserved with great care till her departure.

During her illness, Elizabeth often reproved her brother and sister,
saying, "If you are not better you will certainly go to a place of
misery." On every occasion she discovered a great love to prayer; and
when by weakness she was prevented from going to chapel, she learned her
tasks; and what she did learn and hear, was, by a Divine blessing,
deeply impressed on her mind.

For the last five weeks before her death, she was not in the least
terrified at her approaching dissolution; but conversed with pleasure on
her departure. Her father asked her one day, when in great pain, whether
she loved the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ? to which she answered,
"Yes, I do, and I shall soon be with him in glory." Mr. B., one of the
teachers of the school, called to see her; and after conversing with her
some time, asked her, "If she should like to go to heaven?" to which she
answered, "Yes."

On April the 24th, when in great pain, on viewing her hands, she said,
"O father! the blood ran from the hands of Jesus Christ when he was
nailed to the cross, and that was done by wicked men, but I shall go and
see him in heaven." At another time, when her parents, talking of the
sufferings of Christ, said that he died to save good children, and would
take them to sit with him on his throne for ever, and would give them
crowns of glory. To which she answered, "It seems, father, as if I could
see him." On the same day she said, "I do hope when my body dies, that
God will receive my soul to heaven." After this she related to her
parents the account of the rich man in the Gospel; observing that he was
tormented in hell, and could not so much as obtain a drop of water to
cool his burning tongue, while poor Lazarus was carried to Abraham's
bosom, where he was crowned with happiness.

She was visited by her much beloved teacher Miss S., whom she had long
wished to see; and to whom, with the rest of the teachers of the school,
her parents say they shall be always thankful for the good instruction
they gave their dear departed child; and hope that the committee and
teachers of the school at Argyle chapel, and of every other similar
school, will be encouraged by this instance of the good effects of
religious advice in a child only nine years old, to go forward in their
endeavours to bring young sinners to Christ. She was much struck with a
passage of Scripture in Revelation, that Mr. J. preached from: "They
shall be clothed in white." "O," said Elizabeth, "I expect to be clothed
in white too." And as her mother was sitting by her bedside reading, she
said, "If God will let me, I will keep places for you who may be left
behind." Her brother she advised not to play so much, but to be a good
boy, mind his book and school, and pray to God to make him truly
religious; or he would go to a place of misery after death. Being told
that she was very ill, she replied, "I must bear it with patience:"
though, in fact, she longed to be gone. When she was very weak, and
death stared in her face, her parents carried her from one room to
another; but in no place could she find ease. She, however, contemplated
with satisfaction the day when she should eat of the tree of life that
grows in the midst of the paradise of God; "There," said Elizabeth, "I
shall never thirst, nor never sin, but behold the Lamb, who will lead me
to fountains of living water." After lying one day in a doze, she opened
her eyes and said, "Mother, I have seen an angel." Her mother asked her
where? She pointed to the place where she dreamed that she saw him. And,
being asked if she should like to go with him, she answered, "Yes."

     "There I shall see his face,
          And never, never sin;
     There from the rivers of his grace
          Drink endless pleasures in."

Her parents now hung mournfully around her bed, and concluded that the
Lord was going to release her. They saw clearly that she could not
survive long. Being raised up on the following Sabbath in bed, by
pillows, and seeing the children in the street at play, she observed to
them about her how improper it was that they should profane the Sabbath,
and that they ought to be at chapel, and that God would be very angry
with them. Her father had some time before carried her out for the
benefit of the air, daily. And being out with her the Sabbath before her
departure, she pressed him to carry her to chapel; which he did, but was
soon obliged to return with her, when she exclaimed, "Farewell, chapel;
farewell, Mr. J.; farewell, my beloved teachers; farewell, my dear
schoolfellows;" and soon after she said, "Farewell, brother and sister;
farewell, father and mother. I charge you all to meet me in heaven, that
we may spend an eternity of happiness together there." And on the 27th
of May, 1804, after a few struggles, the feeble springs of life stood
still, and her happy spirit took its flight to the paradise of God.



BOOKS FOR SUNDAY SCHOOLS.
---
200 Mulberry-street, New York.
-----
IDLE DICK AND POOR WATCHMAKER.
Originally written in French, by Rev. CESAR MALAN, of Geneva. With
Illustrations. 18mo., pp. 82. Price, 15 cents.

MOUNTAINS OF THE PENTATEUCH.
Conversations on the Mountains of the Pentateuch, and the Scenes and
Circumstances connected with them in Holy Writ. 18mo., pp. 202. Price,
23 cents.

LIFE OF JOHN BUNYAN,
Author of the Pilgrim's Progress. By STEPHEN B. WICKENS. Six
Illustrations. 18mo., pp. 336. Price, 31 cents.

THE TWO DOVES:
Or, Memoirs of Margaret and Anna Dove, late of Leeds, England. By PETER
M'OWAN. 18mo., pp. 88. Price, 17 cents.

THE MOTHERLESS FAMILY.
Two Illustrations. 18mo., pp. 96. Price, 17 cents.

THOMAS HAWKEY TREFFREY.
Parental Portraiture of Thomas Hawkey Treffry, who died at Falmouth.
April 19, 1821, aged eighteen years. By Rev. RICHARD TREFFRY. 18mo., pp.
171. Price, 21 cents.

UNCLE WILLIAM AND HIS NEPHEWS.
Nine Illustrations. 18mo., pp. 61. Price, 16 cents.

MY GRANDFATHER GREGORY.
With Illustrations. 18mo., pp. 116. Price, 18 cents.

MY GRANDMAMMA GILBERT.
By the Author of "My Grandfather Gregory." Illustrated. 18mo., pp. 139.
Price, 20 cents.

THE CONVERTED JEWESS:
A Memoir of Maria ------. 18mo., pp. 107. Price, 18 cents.

NO KING IN ISRAEL;
Or, The Importance of Discipline. By a Sabbath-School Teacher. 18mo.,
pp. 54. Price, 14 cents.

THE JEW AMONG ALL NATIONS.
Eight Illustrations. 18mo., pp. 178. Price, 22 cents.

THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN
Among Children; or, Twenty-five Narratives of a Religious Awakening in a
School in Pomerania. From the German, by CHARLOTTE CLARKE. 18mo., pp.
104. Price, 18 cents.

THE FEATHER AND SONG BIRD.
Illustrated. 18mo., pp. 72. Price, 14 cents.

THE NEST AND EGG.
Illustrated. 18mo., pp. 75. Price, 16 cents.

THE ANIMALCULE AND GALL INSECT.
Illustrated. 18mo., pp. 76. Price, 14 cents.

THE ANT AND SPIDER.
Illustrated. 18mo., pp. 76. Price, 16 cents.

THE FLY AND HONEY BEE.
Illustrated. 18mo., pp. 81. Price, 15 cents.

THE FLOWER AND FRUIT.
Illustrated. 18mo., pp. 77. Price, 16 cents.

THE SEED AND GRASS.
Illustrated. 18mo., pp. 107. Price, 18 cents.

THE TONGUE AND EAR.
Illustrated. 18mo., pp. 93. Price, 17 cents.

THE EYE.
Illustrated. 18mo., pp. 88. Price, 17 cents.

THE HAND.
Illustrated. 18mo., pp. 96. Price, 17 cents.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Stories of Boys and Girls Who Loved
the Saviour, by John Wesley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STORIES OF BOYS AND GIRLS ***

***** This file should be named 30645.txt or 30645.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/6/4/30645/

Produced by Michael Gray

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
