The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Private Diary of Dr. John Dee, by John Dee

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Private Diary of Dr. John Dee
       And the Catalog of His Library of Manuscripts

Author: John Dee

Editor: James Orchard Halliwell (AKA Halliwell-Phillipps)

Release Date: October 16, 2006 [EBook #19553]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PRIVATE DIARY OF DR. JOHN DEE ***




Produced by Louise Hope, David Starner and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





  [Transcriber’s Note:

  This e-text contains a few passages in Greek script:
    Θις νιγτ μι υυιφ δρεμιδ
  If this text does not display properly, or if the quotation marks
  in this paragraph appear as garbage, make sure your text reader’s
  “character set” or “file encoding” is set to Unicode (UTF-8). You may
  also need to change the default font.

  As explained in Footnote n, John Dee’s Diary includes occasional
  words and phrases written in Greek script, but in the English (or
  Latin) language. A transliteration key is given at the end of the
  text, immediately before the Errata.

  Letters written in superscript are shown in {braces} or as ordinals:
  A{o} (_Anno_), 5ª (_quinta_). For consistency, the abbreviation f^o
  in manuscript descriptions is shown as fº to match 4º and 8º.

  Footnotes to the Diary have small letters: [a], [b]. Footnotes to the
  Catalogue are numbered: [1], [2]. Except for footnote references, all
  text in brackets is in the original, as are parenthetical question
  marks.]

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *

                      The
                 PRIVATE DIARY

                      of
                 DR. JOHN DEE,

                      and
  The Catalogue of His Library of Manuscripts,

         from the Original Manuscripts

       in the Ashmolean Museum at Oxford,
    and Trinity College Library, Cambridge.


                   Edited By
     JAMES ORCHARD HALLIWELL, Esq. F.R.S.,
           Hon. M.R.I.A., &C. &C. &C.

      [Illustration: Camden Society Logo]

    London: Printed for the Camden Society,
by John Bowyer Nichols and Son, Parliament Street.

                  M.DCCC.XLII.




  (No. XIX.)




                    COUNCIL
                       of
              THE CAMDEN SOCIETY,
              For The Year 1841-2.

    _President_,
  The Right Hon. LORD FRANCIS EGERTON, M.P.

  THOMAS AMYOT, Esq. F.R.S. Treas. S.A. _Director._
  The Right Hon. LORD BRAYBROOKE, F.S.A.
  JOHN BRUCE, Esq. F.S.A. _Treasurer._
  JOHN PAYNE COLLIER, Esq. F.S.A.
  C. PURTON COOPER, Esq. Q.C., D.C.L., F.R.S., F.S.A.
  T. CROFTON CROKER, Esq. F.S.A., M.R.I.A.
  Sir HENRY ELLIS, K.H., F.R.S., Sec. S.A.
  JAMES ORCHARD HALLIWELL, Esq. F.R.S., F.S.A.
  The Rev. JOSEPH HUNTER, F.S.A.
  Sir FREDERICK MADDEN, K.H., F.R.S., F.S.A.
  JOHN GAGE ROKEWODE, Esq. F.R.S., Dir. S.A.
  THOMAS STAPLETON, Esq. F.S.A.
  WILLIAM J. THOMS, Esq. F.S.A. _Secretary._
  ALBERT WAY, Esq. M.A., F.S.A.
  THOMAS WRIGHT, Esq. M.A., F.S.A.




PREFACE.


The present volume contains two curious documents concerning Dr. Dee,
the eminent philosopher of Mortlake, now for the first time published
from the original manuscripts. I. His Private Diary, written in a very
small illegible hand on the margins of old Almanacs, discovered a few
years ago by Mr. W. H. Black, in the library of the Ashmolean Museum at
Oxford. II. A Catalogue of his Library of Manuscripts, made by himself
before his house was plundered by the populace, and now preserved in the
library of Trinity College, Cambridge.

The publication of this Diary will tend perhaps to set Dee’s character
in its true light, more than any thing that has yet been printed. We
have, indeed, his “Compendious Rehearsall,” which is in some respects
more comprehensive, but this was written for an especial purpose, for
the perusal of royal commissioners, and he has of course carefully
avoided every allusion which could be construed in an unfavourable
light. In the other, however, he tells us his dreams, talks of
mysterious noises in his chamber, evil spirits, and alludes to
various secrets of occult philosophy in the spirit of a true believer.
Mr. D’Israeli has given a correct and able view of his character in his
“Amenities of Literature,” which is remarkably confirmed in almost every
point by the narrative now published. “The imagination of Dee,” observes
that elegant writer, “often predominated over his science; while both
were mingling in his intellectual habits, each seemed to him to confirm
the other. Prone to the mystical lore of what was termed the occult
sciences, which in reality are no sciences at all, since whatever
remains occult ceases to be science, Dee lost his better genius.”
I shall refer the reader to this popular work instead of attempting
an original paper on the subject, which would necessarily be greatly
inferior to that drawn by the masterly hand of the author of the
“Curiosities of Literature.”

The Catalogue of Dee’s Library of Manuscripts, although long since
dispersed, is valuable for the notices which it preserves of several
middle-age treatises not now extant. He is said to have expended on this
collection the sum of three thousand pounds, a very large sum in those
days for a person of limited income.

        J. O. H.
  35, Alfred Place,
    March 15th 1842.




DR. DEE’S DIARY.


1554. Aug. 25th, Barthilmew Hikman born at Shugborowh in
Warwikshyre toward evening. My conjecture, uppon his own reporte of
circumstances. Oct. 25th, D. Daniel Vander Meulen Antwerpiæ, mane hora
quarta.[a]

  [Footnote a: It is almost unnecessary to observe that this and
  the following are notes of nativities. They are not for the most
  part contemporary notices, but apparently inserted at various
  times by Dee when professionally consulted as an astrologer.]

1555. April 22nd, Jane Fromonds borne at Cheyham at none. Aug. 1st,
Ed. Kelly natus hora quarta a meridie[b] ut annotatum reliquit pater
ejus. Oct. 12th, the Lord Willughby born hora septima mane, ante
meridiem, Lat. 51° 30', at Wesell in Gelderland.

  [Footnote b: “Anno 1555, Aug. 1, hora quarta a meridie Wigorniæ
  natus Dominus Edouardus Kelæus,” MS. Ashm. 1788, fol. 140, where
  there is a horoscope of this nativity in the handwriting of
  Dr. Dee. Ashmole, in his MS. 1790, fol. 58, says “Mr. Lilly told
  me that John Evans informed him that he was acquainted with
  Kelly’s sister in Worcester, that she shewed him some of the
  gold her brother had transmuted, and that Kelly was first an
  apothecary in Worcester.”]

1557. July 30th, Mr. Arundell of Cornwayle natus circa [horam]
quartam a meridie.

1558. Dec. 14th, Mary Nevelle, alias Mary Lewknor, borne inter 11 et
meridiem mane, by Chichester.

1560. July 8th, Margaret Russell, Cowntess of Cumberland, hora 2
min. 9 Exoniæ mane.

1561. Aug. 14th, Mr. Heydon, of Baconsthorp in Norfolk, hora noctis
11½ natus in comitatu Surrey.

1563. March 23rd, Mr. William Fennar a meridie inter horam undecimam
et duodecimam nocte. June 23nd, Jane Cooper, now Mystris Kelly,
toward evening. Sept. 28th, Mr. John Ask ante meridiem, by York six
myle on this syde; Elizabeth Mownson, circa horam 9 mane, soror
magistri Thomæ Mownson et uxor magistri Brown.

1564. Mrs. Brigit Cooke borne about seven of the clok on Saynt
David’s Day, which is the first day of March, being Wensday; but I
cannot yet lerne whether it was before none or after. But she
thinketh herself to be but 27 yeres old, anno 1593, Martii primo,
but it cannot be so. June 20th, Mr. Hudson, hora septima ante
meridiem. Aug. 21st, Wenefride Goose, inter 9 et 10 a meridie by
Kingstone.

1565. Sept. 12th, John Pontoys, inter 9 et 10 ante meridiem prope
Stony-Stratford; puto potius hora 8 min. 43. Oct. 17th, Thomas
Kelley[c] hora quarta a meridie at Wurceter. Dec. 21st, Mr. Thomas
Mownson at 11 of the clok in the morning.

  [Footnote c: The brother of the celebrated astrologer before
  mentioned.]

1568. July 14th, William Emery born at Danbery in Essex paulo post
undecimam horam noctis. Sept. 24th, Margaret Anderson mane inter 7
et 8.

1571. Samuel Swallow borne at Thaxstede in Essex Feb. 15 ante
meridiem, inter horam undecimam et duodecimam, forte hora media post
undecimam.

1575. July 31st, Simeon Stuard natus ante diluculum per horam 11½ at
Shinfelde; his grandfather by the mother was Dr. Huyck the Quene’s
physicien.

1577. Jan. 16th, the Erle of Lecester, Mr. Phillip Sydney, Mr. Dyer,
&c., came to my howse.[d] Jan. 22nd, The Erle of Bedford cam to my
howse. Feb. 19th, great wynde S.W., close, clowdy. March 11th, my
fall uppon my right nuckul bone, hora 9 fere mane; wyth oyle of
Hypericon in 24 howres eased above all hope: God be thanked for such
his goodness of his creatures! March 24th, Alexander Simon the
Ninivite came to me, and promised me his servise into Persia. May
1st, I received from M. William Harbert of St. Gillian his notes
uppon my Monas.[e] May 2nd, I understode of one Vincent Murfyn his
abhominable misusing me behinde my back; Mr. Thomas Besbich told me
his father is one of the cokes of the Court. May 20th, I hyred the
barber of Cheswik, Walter Hooper, to kepe my hedges and knots in as
good order as he sed them than, and that to be done with twise
cutting in the yere at the least and he to have yerely five
shillings, [and] meat and drink. June 10th, circa 10, a shower of
hayle and rayne. June 18th, borrowed £40 of John Hilton of Fulham.
June 19th, I understode of more of Vincent Murfyn his knavery;
borrowed £20 of Bartylmew Newsam. June 20th, borow £27 uppon the
chayn of golde. June 26th, Elen Lyne gave me a quarter’s warning.
June 27th, showrs of rayne and hayle. Aug. 19th, the Hexameron
Brytanicum[f] put to printing.

  [Footnote d: “Dr. Dee dwelt in a house neere the water side,
  a little westward from the church [at Mortlake]. The buildings
  which Sir Fr. Crane erected for working of tapestry hangings, and
  are still (1673) employed to that use, were built upon the
  ground whereon Dr. Dee’s laboratory and other roomes for that
  use stood. Upon the west is a square court, and the next is the
  house wherein Dr. Dee dwelt, now inhabited by one Mr. Selbury,
  and further west his garden.” --MS. Ashm. 1788, fol. 149. The
  same account says that “Dr. Dee was wel beloved and respected of
  all persons of quality thereabouts, who very often invited him
  to their houses or came to his.”]

  [Footnote e: This of course is his celebrated Monas
  Hieroglyphica, frequently printed, and the nature of which
  I attempted to explain in a paper read before the Society of
  Antiquaries. Mr. Herbert, according to MS. Ashm. 1788, “dwelt
  then in Mortlack and was an intimate friend of Dr. Dee’s.”]

  [Footnote f: This was his work printed in 1577 under the title
  of General and Rare Memorials pertayning to the perfect Art of
  Navigation, in folio, now a book of the greatest rarity. The
  original manuscript of it is in MS. Ashm. 1789, and Dee’s own
  copy of the published work with MS. notes and additions is
  preserved in the British Museum. In his Letter Apologetical,
  4to. Lond. 1603, he cites this work under the title of The
  Brytish Monarchie, as having been written in the year 1576.]

Nov. 3rd, William Rogers of Mortlak, abowt 7 of the clok in the
morning, cut his own throte, by the fende his instigation. Nov. 6th,
Sir Umfrey Gilbert cam to me to Mortlak. Nov. 18th, borowed of Mr.
Edward Hynde of Mortlak £30 to be repayed at Hallowtyde next yere.
Nov. 20th, two tydes in the forenone, the first 2 or 3 howres to
sone. Nov. 22nd, I rod to Windsor to the Q. Majestie. Nov. 25th,
I spake with the Quene hora quinta. Nov. 28th, I spake with the Quene
hora quinta; I spake with Mr. Secretary Walsingham.[g] I declared to
the Quene her title to Greenland, Estetiland and Friseland.

  [Footnote g: Ashmole informs us that Walsingham continued for a
  length of time one of Dr. Dee’s best patrons.]

Dec. 1st, I spake with Sir Christofer Hatton; he was made knight
that day. Dec. 1st, I went from the cowrte at Wyndsore. Dec. 30th,
inexplissima illa calumnia de R. Edwardo, iniquissime aliqua ex
parte in me denunciabatur: ante aliquos elapsos dies, sed ... sua
sapientia me innocentem.

1578. Feb. 5th, sponsalia cum Jana Fromonds horam circiter primam.
April 28th, I caused Sir Rowland Haywood to examyn Francys Baily of
his sklandering me, which he denyed utterly. June 13th, rayn and in
the afternone a little thunder. June 30th, I told Mr. Daniel
Rogers,[h] Mr. Hackluyt of the Middle Temple being by, that Kyng
Arthur and King Maty, both of them, did conquier Gelindia, lately
called Friseland, which he so noted presently in his written copy of
Monumethensis,[i] for he had no printed boke therof. July 14th, my
sister Elizabeth Fromonds cam to me. July 27th, hora 9, min. 15 a
meridie Francis Cowntess of Hertford.

  [Footnote h: Rogers was a member of the University of Oxford,
  and a large commonplace-book in his handwriting is in Archbishop
  Tenison’s library in St. Martin’s-in-the-Fields.]

  [Footnote i: That is, Galfridus Monumetensis de gestis regum
  Britanniæ. Hackluyt mentions this fact in his collection of
  voyages.]

Aug. 5th, Mr. Raynolds of Bridewell tok his leave of me as he passed
toward Darthmowth to go with Sir Umfry Gilbert toward Hocheleya.
Aug. 15, I went toward Norwich with my work of Imperium
Brytanicum.[k] Aug. 23rd, I cam to London from Norwich. Aug. 31st,
I went to my father-in-law Mr. Fromonds to Cheyham.

  [Footnote k: This is the book just mentioned under the title of
  General and Rare Memorials, fol. Lond. 1577.]

Sept. 1st, I cam from Cheyham. Sept. 6th, Elen Lyne, my mayden,
departed from this life immediately after the myd-day past, when she
had lyne sik a month lacking one day. Sept. 12th, Jane Gaele cam to
my servyce, and she must have four nobles by the yere, 26_s._ 8_d._
Sept. 25th, Her Majestie cam to Richemond from Grenwich. Sept. 26,
the first rayn that came for many a day; all pasture abowt us was
withered: rayn afternone like Aprill showres. Oct. 8th, the Quene’s
Majestie had conference with me at Richemond inter 9 et 11. Oct.
16th, Dr. Bayly conferred of the Quene her disease. Oct. 22nd, Jane
Fromonds went to the court at Richemond. Oct. 25th, a fit from 9
afternone to 1 after mydnight. Oct. 28, the Erle of Lecester and Sir
Francys Walsingham, secretary, determined my going over for the
Quene’s Majestie. Nov. 4th, I was directed to my voyage by the Erle
of Lecester and Mr. Secretary Walsingham hora nona. Nov. 7th, I cam
to Gravesende. Nov. 9th, I went from Lee to sea. Nov. 14th, I cam to
Hamburgh hora tertia. Dec. 11th, to Franckfurt-uppon-Oder. Dec.
15th, newes of Turnifer’s comming hora octava mane, by a speciall
mesenger.

1579. A moyst Marche and not wyndy. June 10th, I shewed to
Mr. John Lewis and his sonne, the physition, the manner of drawing
aromaticall oyles. At that tyme my cat got a fledge yong sparrow
which had onely a right wyng naturally. June 15th, my mother
surrendred Mortlak howses and land, and had state geven in plena
curia ad terminum vitæ, and to me was also the reversion delivered
per virgam, and to my wife Jane by me, and after to my heirs and
assignes for ever, to understand, Mr. Bullok and Mr. Taylor,
surveyor, at Wimbledon, under the tree by the church. June 22nd, Mr.
Richard Hickman and Barthilmew his nephew cam to me with Mr. Flowr,
commended by Mr. Vicechamberlayn Sir Christopher Hatton.

July 6th, Mr. Hitchcok, who had travayled in the plat for fishing,
made acquayntance with me, and offred me great curtesy.

July 13th, Arthurus Dee natus[l] puer mane hor. 4 min. 30 fere, vel
potius min. 25, in ipso ortu solis, ut existimo. After 10 of the
clock this night my wive’s father Mr. Fromonds was speechles, and
died on Tuesday (July 14th) at 4 of the clock in the morning. July
16th, Arthur was christened at 3 of the clok afternone; Mr. Dyer and
Mr. Doctor Lewys, judg of the Admiralty, were his godfathers; and
Mistres Blanche Pary of the Privie Chamber his godmother. But Mr.
John Harbert of Estshene was deputy for Dr. Lewys, and Mystres
Awbrey was deputy for my cosen Mistres Blanche Pary.

  [Footnote l: His horoscope is in MS. Ashm. 1788. “Mr. Arthur
  Dee’s birth was accompanied by the unhappy accident of the death
  of Mr. Fromonds, his mother’s father, who died that morning.”
  --MS. Ashm. 1790, fol. 63.]

Aug. 8th, John Elmeston,[m] student of Oxford, cam to me for
dialling. Aug. 9th, Jane Dee churched. Aug. 16th, Monsieur cam
secretly to the court from Calays. Aug. 20th, wyndy, clowdy, rayny.
Aug. 26, Monsieur went back agayn to France. Sept. 10th, my dream of
being naked, and my skyn all overwrowght with work like some kinde
of tuft mockado, with crosses blew and red; and on my left arme,
abowt the arme, in a wreath, this word I red-- sine me nihil
potestis facere: and another the same night of Mr. Secretary
Walsingham, Mr. Candish, and myself.

  [Footnote m: This person is not noticed by the Oxford
  biographers.]

Oct. 3rd, Sir Leonel Ducket his unkend letter for mony. Oct. 4th,
goodman Hilton requested me for his ij. sonnes to resort to my
howse. Oct. 5th, raging wynde at West and Southerly, in the night
chefely. Oct. 9th, 10th, 11th, 12th, great rayne for three or four
dayes and nights. Oct. 13th, this day it broke up; the fote bote for
the ferry at Kew was drowned and six persons, by the negligens of
the ferryman overwhelming the boat uppon the roap set there to help,
by reason of the vehement and high waters. Oct. 18th, Mr. Adrian
Gilbert and John Davys reconcyled themselves to me, and disclosed
some of Emery his most unhonest, hypocriticall, and devilish
dealings and devises agaynst me and other, and likewise of that
errant strompet her abominable wordes and dedes; and John Davis sayd
that he might curse the tyme that ever he knew Emery, and so much
followed his wicked cownsayle and advyse. So just is God! Oct. 31st,
payed xx_s._ fyne for me and Jane my wife to the Lord of Wimbleton
(the Quene), by goodman Burton of Putney, for the surrender taken of
my mother of all she hath in Mortlak to Jane and me, and than to my
heyres and assynes, &c.

Nov. 25th, the Lord Clinton cam to me and offred Skirbeck by Boston
for Long Lednam. Nov. 29th, I receyved a letter from Mr. Thomas
Jones. Dec. 9th, Θις νιγτ μι υυιφ δρεμιδ θατ ονε καμ το ἑρ ανδ
τουχεδ ἑρ, σαιινγ, “Μιστρες Δεε, yου αρ κονκειυεδ οφ χιλδ, ὑος ναμε
μυστ βε Ζαχαριας; βε οφ γυδ χερε, ἑ σαλ δο υυελ ας θις δοθ!”[n]
Dec. 22nd, I payd Jane 13_s._ and 4_d._ for her wagys tyll Michelmas
last, for the half yere, so that I owe her yet 6_s._ 8_d._ Dec.
28th, I reveled to Roger Coke[o] the gret secret of the elixir of
the salt οφ ακετελς ονε υππον α υνδρεδ.

  [Footnote n: Dee has occasionally made use of Greek letters
  for the preservation of his notes, still retaining the English
  language. The present passage may as well be given:-- “This
  night my wife dreamed that one cam to her and touched her,
  saying, ‘Mistres Dee, you are conceived of child, whose name
  must be Zacharias; be of good chere, he sal do well as this
  doth!’”]

  [Transcriber’s Note:
  See Transliteration Key at end of text.]

  [Footnote o: In a more appropriate place I shall give from an
  Ashmolean manuscript a traditionary anecdote relating to this
  Roger Coke, or Cooke, and the great secret which Dee revealed to
  him.]

1580. Jan. 13th, I gave my wife mony for the month. Jan. 16th,
Arthur fell sick, stuffed with cold fleym, could not slepe, had no
stomach to eat or drink as he had done before. Feb. 26th, this night
the fyre all in flame cam into my maydens chamber agayne, betwene an
eleven and twelve of the cloke; contynued half an howr terribly, so
it did a yere before to the same maydens, Mary Cunstable and Jane
Gele. May 17th, at the Moscovy howse for the Cathay voyage. June
3rd, Mr. A. Gilbert and J. Davys rod homward into Devonshire. June
7th, Mr. Skydmor and his wife lay at my howse and Mr. Skydmor’s
dowghter, and the Quene’s dwarf Mrs. Tomasin. June 8th, my wife went
with Mistres Skydmor to the court. June 12th, Mr. Zackinson and Mr.
Cater lay at my howse, having supped at my Lady Crofts. June 14th,
Mr. Fosku of the Wardrip lay at my howse, and went the next day to
London with Mr. Coweller. July 15th, the Lady Croft went from
Mortlak to the court at Otlands. June 30th, payd Jane 20_s._ for
thre quarters’ wages, so that all that is due is payd, and all other
recknengs likewise is payd her 6_s._ 8_d._; and Mary Constable was
payd all old reknings 15_s._, and my wife had eleven pounds to
dischardge all for thirteen wekes next, that is, till the 5th of
November: I delivered Mr. Williams, the person of Tendring, a lettre
of atturney agaynst one White of Colchester, for a sklaundre.

Aug. 27th, Arthur was weaned this night first. Aug. 28th, my dealing
with Sir Humfrey Gilbert for his graunt of discovery. Aug. 30th,
Nurse Darant was discharged and had 10_s._ given her, which was the
whole quarter’s wages due at a fortnight after Michelmas.

Sept. 6th, the Quene’s Majestie cam to Richemond. Sept. 10th, Sir
Humfry Gilbert graunted me my request to him, made by letter, for
the royaltyes of discovery all to the North above the parallell of
the 50 degree of latitude, in the presence of Stoner, Sir John
Gilbert, his servant or reteiner; and thereuppon toke me by the hand
with faithfull promises in his lodging of John Cooke’s howse in
Wichcross strete, where wee dyned onely us three together, being
Satterday. Sept. 13th, Mr. Lock browght Benjamyn his sonne to me:
his eldest sonne also, called Zacharie, cam then with him. Sept.
17th, the Quene’s Majestie cam from Rychemond in her coach, the
higher way of Mortlak felde, and whan she cam right against the
church she turned down toward my howse: and when she was against my
garden in the felde she stode there a good while, and than cam ynto
the street at the great gate of the felde, where she espyed me at my
doore making obeysains to her Majestie; she beckend her hand for me;
I cam to her coach side, she very speedily pulled off her glove and
gave me her hand to kiss; and to be short, asked me to resort to her
court, and to give her to wete when I cam ther; hor. 6¼ a meridie.
Sept. 14th, I began against Vincent Murphyn. Sept. 15th, I wrote to
the bishop of London. Sept. 22nd, my declaration against Vincent
Murphin put into the court of Geldhall.

Oct. 3rd, on Munday, at 11 of the clok before none, I delivered my
two rolls of the Quene’s Majesties title unto herself in the garden
at Richemond, who appointed after dynner to heare furder of the
matter. Therfore betwene one and two afternone, I was sent for into
her highnes Pryvy Chamber, where the Lord Threasurer allso was, who,
having the matter slightly then in consultation, did seme to dowt
much that I had or could make the argument probable for her highnes’
title so as I pretended. Wheruppon I was to declare to his honor
more playnely, and at his leyser, what I had sayd and could say
therin, which I did on Tuesday and Wensday following, at his
chamber, where he used me very honorably on his behalf. Oct. 7th,
on Fryday I cam to my Lord Threasorer, and he being told of my
being without, and allso I standing before him at his comming furth,
did not or would not speak to me, I dowt not of some new greif
conceyved. Oct. 10th, the Quene’s Majestie, to my great cumfort
(hora quinta), cam with her trayn from the court and at my dore
graciously calling me to her, on horsbak, exhorted me briefly to
take my mother’s death patiently, and withall told me that the Lord
Threasorer had gretly commended my doings for her title, which he
had to examyn, which title in two rolls he had browght home two
howrs before; she remembred allso how at my wive’s death it was
her fortune likewise to call uppon me.[p] At 4 of the clok in the
morning my mother Jane Dee dyed at Mortlak; she made a godly ende:
God be praysed therfore! She was 77 yere old. Oct. 20th, I had by my
jury at Geldhall £100 damages awarded me against Vincent Murphyn the
cosener. Oct. 22nd, with much ado I had judgment against Murfin at
Geldhall. My mervaylous horsnes and in manner spechelesnes toke me,
being nothing at all otherwise sick. Oct. 25th, Morrice Kyffin
departed from me with my leave. Nov. 2nd, the Lord Threasorer sent
me a haunche of venison. Thomas Suttley had the bishop of Canterbury
his letter for Sir Richard. Nov. 3rd, I writt to my Lord Threasurer.
Nov. 6th, Helen cam to my servyse. Nov. 12th, somwhat better in my
voyce. Nov. 22nd, the blasing star[q] I cold see no more, though it
were a cler night. Dec. 1st, newes cam by Dr. Deny from Ireland of
the Italiens overthrow whom the Pope had sent, the Quene lying at
Richemond. Dec. 6th, the Quene removed from Richmond. Dec. 8th,
recepi literas Roma, scriptas per fratrem Laudervicea.

  [Footnote p: His first wife died on the 16th of March 1575, when
  “the Queen’s Majestie, with her most honourable Privy Council,
  and other her Lords and Nobility, came purposely to have visited
  my library: but finding that my wife was within four houres
  before buried out of the house, her Majestie refused to come in;
  but willed to fetch my glass so famous, and to show unto her
  some of the properties of it, which I did; her Majestie being
  taken down from her horse by the Earle of Leicester, Master of
  the Horse, at the church wall of Mortlake, did see some of the
  properties of that glass, to her Majestie’s great contentment
  and delight.” --_Compendious Memorial_, p. 516. This glass is
  spoken of again.]

  [Footnote q: Dee has made a rough sketch of the appearance of
  this comet, with its long tail, on the margin of the MS.]

1581.[r] Feb. 9th, I agreed with Mr. Gentle Godolphin for to release
the coosener Vincent Murphin. Feb. 11th, Harry Prise, of Lewsam, cam
to me at Mortlak, and told of his dreames often repeated, and uppon
my prayer to God this night, his dreame was confirmed, and better
instruction given. Feb. 12th, Sir William Harbert cam to Mortlak.
Feb. 23rd, I made acquayntance with Joannes Bodinus, in the Chambre
of Presence at Westminster, the embassador being by from Monsieur.
Feb. 26th, a very fayr calm warm day.

  [Footnote r: An original diary of the chemical experiments made
  by Dr. Dee in this year is preserved in the Bodleian Library.
  --MS. Rawl. Miscel. 241.]

March 8th, it was the 8 day, being Wensday, hora noctis 10, 11, the
strange noyse in my chamber of knocking; and the voyce, ten tymes
repeted, somewhat like the shrich of an owle, but more longly drawn,
and more softly, as it were in my chamber. March 12th, all
reckenings payd to Mr. Hudson, £11. 17_s._ March 13th, Elizabeth
Kyrton cam to my servys. March 23rd, at Mortlak cam to me Hugh
Smyth, who had returned from Magellan straights and Vaygatz; after
that, raynie, stormie wynde, S.W.

March 25th, Helen was hyred at our Lady day for the yere for fowr
nobles wagis; she had her covenant peny, and allso vj_s._ viij_d._
for her payns taken synce she came. April 3rd, I ryd toward
Snedgreene, to John Browne, to here and see the manner of the
doings. April 14th, I cam home from Snedgreene. May 25th, I had
sight in Χρυσταλλω offerd me, and I saw. June 7th, hora 7½ mane nata
est Katharina Dee. June 10th, baptisata a meridie hor. 5½ Katharina.
Mr. Packington of the court, my Lady Katarin Crofts, wife to Sir
James Crofts, Mr. Controller of the Quene’s household, Mystres Mary
Skydmor of the Privie Chamber, and cosen to the Quene, by theyr
deputies christened Katharin Dee. June 17th, yong Mr. Hawkins, who
had byn with Sir Francis Drake, cam to me to Mortlake. June 30th,
Mr. John Leonard Haller, of Hallerstein, by Worms in Germany,
receyved his instructions manifold for his jornay to Quinsay, which
jornay I moved him unto, and instructed him plentifully for the
variation of the compas, observing in all places as he passed.

July 6th, my wife churched. July 7th, in the morning at 1¾ after
mydnight, Mr. Hinde his sonne born. July 10th, my right sholder and
elbow-joynt were so extremely in payn that I was not able in 14
dayes to lift my arme owtward not an ynche; the payn was extreme;
I used Mr. Larder, Mr. Alles, and Alise Davyes, and abowt the 25 day
I mended. July 12th, abowt 10 of the clock ½ before noone ρογερ ἱς
ινκρεδιβλε δογγεδνες ανδ ινγρατεφυλνες αγαινς με το μι φακε, αλμοστ
ρεδι το λαι υιολεντ ανδς ον με, μαγερ ενρικ καν παρτελι τελ. At the
same day the Erle of Lecester fell fowly owt with the Erle of
Sussex, Lord Chamberlayn, calling each other traytor, whereuppon
both were commanded to kepe theyr chambers at Greenwich, wher the
court was. July 19th, Mr. Henrick went to London to visit his wife
and children. July 26th, Mr. Haylok cam, and goodman King with him.
July 28th, Mr. Collens did ride into Lincolneshire.

Aug. 3rd, all the night very strange knocking and rapping in my
chamber. Aug. 4th, and this night likewise. Katharin was sent home
from nurse Maspely, of Barnes, for fear of her mayd’s sicknes, and
goodwife Benet gave her suck. Aug. 11th, Katharine Dee was shifted
to nurse Garret at Petersham on Fryday, the next day after St.
Lawrence day, being the 11th day of the month; my wife went on foot
with her, and Ellen Cole, my mayd, George and Benjamin, in very
great showres of rayn. Aug. 12th, recepi literas a D. Doctore Andrea
Hess occultæ philosophiæ studioso, per Richardi Hesketh amici mei,
Antwerpiæ agentis, diligentiam in negociis meis, et recepi, una cum
literis, Mercurii Mensitam seu Sigillam Planetarum. Aug. 26th, abowt
8½ (at night) a strange meteore in forme of a white clowde crossing
galaxiam, whan it lay north and sowth over our zenith; this clowd
was at length from the S.E. to the S.W. sharp at both endes, and in
the west ende it was forked for a while; it was abowt sixty degrees
high, it lasteth an howr, all the skye clere abowt, and fayr
starshyne.

Sept.[s] 5th, Roger Cook, who had byn with me from his 14 yeres of
age till 28, of a melancholik nature, pycking and devising occasions
of just cause to depart on the suddayn, abowt 4 of the clok in the
afternone requested of me lycense to depart, wheruppon rose whott
words between us; and he, imagining with hisself that he had the
12 of July deserved my great displeasure and finding himself barred
from vew of my philosophicall dealing with Mr. Henrik, thowght
that he was utterly recest from intended goodnes toward him.
Notwithstanding Roger Cook his unseamely dealing, I promised him, yf
he used himself toward me now in his absens, one hundred pounds[t]
as sone as of my own clene hability I myght spare so much; and
moreover, if he used himself well in lif toward God and the world,
I promised him some pretty alchimicall experiments, whereuppon he
might honestly live. Sept. 7th, Roger Cook went for alltogether from
me. Sept. 29th, Robert Gardner, of Shrewsbury, cam to my servyce.

  [Footnote s: Dr. Dee, in the Rawlinson MS. just quoted,
  observes, in his notes on this month, “Mr. Harry Waters went
  away the 2nd day, malcontent. John Dee, Jesus bless me!”]

  [Footnote t: This probably gave rise to the anecdote which is
  related in MS. Ashm. 1788, fol. 147, viz. that “he revealed to
  one Roger Cooke the great secret of the elixar, as he called it,
  of the salt of metalls, the projection whereof was one upon an
  hundred.”]

Oct. 8th, I had newes of the chests of bokes fownd by Owndle in
Northamptonshyre; Mr. Barnabas Sawle told me of them, but I fownd no
truth in it. Oct. 9th, Barnabas Saul, lying in the ... hall was
strangely trubled by a spirituall creature abowt mydnight. Oct.
13th, I rod to Sowth Myms. Oct. 14th, to St. Nedes. Oct. 16th,
at Mr. Hikman’s. Oct. 20th, at Tosseter. Oct. 21st, Oxford, Dr.
Cradocke. Oct. 23rd, from Oxford to Wyckam. Oct. 24th, I cam home.
Robert Hilton cam to my service. Nov. 16th, the Quene removed to
White Hall, and Monsieur with her. Nov. 27th, I rod to Greensede.
Nov. 28th, to goodman Wykham, 2 myles beyond Chayly by Lewys. Nov.
29th, I made acquayntance with Mr. George Kylmer for Sir George his
bokes. Nov. 30th, I cam home. Dec. 1st, Katharyn Dee her nurse was
payd 6_s._ so nothing is owing to her. Dec. 5th, Elen my mayden fell
sick. Dec. 7th, George my man had the great fall of the ladder, hora
10 fere mane. Dec. 8th, I sent a letter to Mr. Kylmer. Dec. 22nd, my
Lord Chanceler’s sonne, Mr. Bromley, and Sir William Herbert cam to
me. Helen Cole was payd her wages and reckening tyll this Christmas,
and so discharged my servyce, being newly recovered of her ague. Her
desyre was to go to her frendes.

1582. Jan. 11th, Robert Gardener desired my leave to go dwell with
Sir William Herbert, hora 12. Jan. 16th, Mistris Harbert cam to
Essexe. Jan. 17th, Randal Hatton cam home from Samuel’s father at
Stratton Audley. Jan. 22nd, Arthur Dee and Mary Herbert, they being
but 3 yere old the eldest, did make as it wer a shew of childish
marriage, of calling ech other husband and wife. Jan. 22, 23rd. The
first day Mary Herbert cam to her father’s hous at Mortlak, and the
second day she cam to her father’s howse at Estshene. Jan. 23rd, my
wife went to nurse Garret and payd her for this month ending the 26
day. Jan. 27th, Barnabas Sawl his brother cam. Feb. 12th, abowt 9 of
the clok, Barnabas Saul and his brother Edward went homward from
Mortlak: Saul his inditement being by law fownd insufficient at
Westminster Hall: Mr. Serjeant Walmesley, Mr. Owen and Mr. Hyde, his
lawyers at the bar for the matter, and Mr. Ive, the clerk of the
Crown Office, favouring the other. Feb. 20th, Mr. Bigs of Stentley
by Huntingdon and John Littlechild cam to me. I receyved a letter
from Barnabas Saul. Feb. 21st, Mr. Skullthorp rod toward Barnabas.
Feb. 25th, Mr. Skulthorp cam home. Payd nurse Garret for Katharin
tyll Fryday the 23 day, vj_s._ then somethyng due to nurse for iij.
pownd of candell and 4 pownd of sope.

March 1st, Mr. Clerkson browght Magnus to me at Mortlak, and so went
that day agayn. March 6th, Barnabas Saul cam this day agayn abowt
one of the clok and went to London the same afternone. He confessed
that he neyther hard or saw any spirituall creature any more. March
8th, Mr. Clerkson and his frende cam to my howse. Barnabas went home
agayn abowt 3 or 2 clok, he lay not at my howse now; he went, I say,
on Thursday, with Mr. Clerkson. March 8th, cœlum ardere et instar
sanguinis in diversis partibus rubere visum est circa horam nonam
noctis, maxime versus septentrionalem et occidentalem partem:
sed ultra capita nostra versus austrum frequenter miles quasi
sanguineus. March 9th, Fryday at dynner tyme Mr. Clerkson and Mr.
Talbot[v] declared a great deale of Barnabas nowghty dealing toward
me, as in telling Mr. Clerkson ill things of me that I should mak
his frend, as that he was wery of me, that I wold so flatter his
frende the lerned man that I wold borow him of him. But his frend
told me, before my wife and Mr. Clerkson, that a spirituall creature
told him that Barnabas had censured both Mr. Clerkson and me. The
injuries which this Barnabas had done me diverse wayes were very
great. March 22nd, Mr. Talbot went to London, to take his jornay.

  [Footnote v: Just above this relation some one has written,
  “you that rede this underwritten assure yourselfe that yt is
  a shamfull lye, for Talbot neither studied for any such thinge
  nor shewed himselfe dishonest in any thinge.” Dr. Dee has thus
  commented upon it:-- “This is Mr. Talbot or that lerned man, his
  own writing in my boke, very unduely as he cam by it.” There are
  several other notices of Talbot erased, but whether by him or
  by the Doctor it is impossible to say, but most probably the
  former.]

April 16th, Nurse Garet had her 6_s._ for her month ending on the
20th day. April 22nd, a goodly showr of rayn this morning early.
May 4th, Mr. Talbot went. May 13th, Jane rod to Cheyham. May 15th,
nocte circa nonam cometa apparuit in septentrione versus occidentem
aliquantulum; cauda versus astrum tendente valde magna, et stella
ipsa vix sex gradus super horizontem. May 20th, Robertus Gardinerus
Salopiensis lætum mihi attulit nuncium de materia lapidis, divinitus
sibi revelatus de qua.... May 23rd, Robert Gardener declared unto me
hora 4½ a certeyn great philosophicall secret, as he had termed it,
of a spirituall creatuer, and was this day willed to come to me and
declare it, which was solemnly done, and with common prayer. May
28th, Mr. Eton of London cam with his son-in-law Mr. Edward Bragden,
as concerning Upton parsonage, to have me to resign or let it unto
his said son-in-law, whom I promised to let understand whenever
myself wold consent to forego it. June 9th, I writ to the Archbishop
of Canterbury a letter in Latin: Mr. Doctor Awbrey did carry it.
June 14th, Morryce Kyffin did viset me. June 22nd, Nurse Garret had
6_s._ for a month ending the 18 day of May; she is to have for a
month wages ending the 15 day of this June. My wife went this Friday
thither with Benjamyn. June 27th, Mystris Stafford arrested me hora
11: I payd all.

July 3rd, hor. 12¼, Arthur Dee fell from the top of the Water-gate
Stayres down to the fote from the top, and cut his forhed on the
right eyebrow. Sir Richard browght the rent. July 6th, in feare of
resting by proctor Lewys: tyll 9½ at night from 1 afternone at the
Docter’s comming. July 12th, Proctor Lewys agred withall. July 13th,
Mr. Talbot cam abowt 3 of the clok afternone, with whom I had some
wordes of unkendnes: we parted frendely: he sayd that the Lord
Morley had the Lord Mountegle his bokes. He promised me some of
Doctor Myniver’s bokes. July 16th, Mr. William Pole, whome Phillip
Simons, somtymes barber to the old Erle of Tavistok, doth knowe, cam
to me, and made acquayntance with me: promised to com agayn within
xiiij. dayes. Jane my wife went to Nurse Garret’s to pay her 12_s._
for her wages due tyll Friday last, which was Saint Margaret’s day,
and brought her xij_d._ for candles: she went by water; Mistres Lee
went with her, and Robyn Jackesbite. Jane this night was sore
trubbled with a collick and cramp in her belly; she vomyted this
Monday more, and every night grew stiff in the sole likewise.
A meridie hor. 3½ cam Sir George Peckham to me to know the tytle
for Norombega in respect of Spayn and Portugall parting the whole
world’s distilleryes. He promysed me of his gift and of his patient
....... of the new conquest, and thought to get so moche of Mr.
Gerardes gift to be sent me with seale within a few days. July 18th,
Barthilmew Knaresburgh his sone borne at break of day abowt 3 of the
clok. June 19th, Barnabas Saul came to see me at Mortlak: I chyd hym
for his manifold untrue reports. July 23d, Mistris Franklin’s sone
borne at noone. July 24th, Robert Gardiner cam, and went on the
26th.

Aug. 8th, Kate was sickly. Aug. 11th, Mr. Bacon and Mr. Phillips of
the court cam. Aug. 20th, Katarine still seemed to be diseasid. Aug.
25th, Katharin was taken home from nurse Garret of Petersham, and
weaned at home. Aug. 31st, Benjamin Lock told me of his father’s
mynde to send him to Spayn within three or four days. Sept. 1st,
I did for Sir John Killegrew devise the way of protestation to
save him harmless for compounding with Spaniard who was robbed: he
promised me fish against Lent. Sept. 10th, Mr. John Leonard Haller,
of Hallersteyn, by Worms in Germany, cam agayn to me, to declare his
readines to go toward Quinsay; and how he wold go and ly at Venys
all this winter, and from thens to Constantinople. I requested
Mr. Charles Sted to help him to make his mony over to Paris and
Nuremberg, and to help him with the sercher of Rye to pass his
horse, and to help him with Mr. Osborn the alderman with his letters
to Constantinople. Sept. 11th, on Tuesday they went to London
together, and my wife allso abowt her affayres. Sept. 13th, I writt
to Dugenes de Dionigiis to Venys by Mr. John Leonard Haller. Sept.
17th, I writ to the Erle of Osmond. Sept. 29th, Anne cam to my
servyse from Mr. Harbert. I payd Mr. Lewys £20, so rest is which I
challendg as for my cost and payns for 37 yeres for John his son.

Oct. 12th, I rod to Tundridge. Oct. 13th, I rod from Tundridge to
Mr. Coverts at Slawgham. Oct. 15th, I cam home from Slawgham, and
dyned at Mr. Holtens, person of Oxstede by Tundridge, a phisitien.
Oct. 21st, Jane my wife sowned in the church. Nov. 1st, Mr. Plat, my
brother Yong his sonne-in-law, cam to me with a stranger of Trushen,
born at Regius Mons: his name is Martinus Faber. The same day cam
Mr. Clement the seamaster and Mr. Ingram from Sir George Peckham.
Nov. 8th, hayle afternone horam circiter primam: tonitrus circa
quartam et sextam. Nov. 9th, Mr. Newbury, who had byn at Cambaya in
Inde, cam to me. Nov. 22nd, E. K. went to London, and so the next
day conveied by rode toward Blakley, and within ten dayes to
returne. Nov. 24th, Saterday night I dremed that I was deade, and
afterward my bowels wer taken out I walked and talked with diverse,
and among other with the Lord Thresorer who was com to my howse to
burn my bokes when I was dead, and thought he loked sourely on me.
Dec. 1st, George my man, who had lyne oute all night, this morning
used me very dishonestly, and sayd he owed me no servyce. Mr.
Bettgran the justice was not at home. Dec. 13th, thunder in the
afternone and at sonne-set. Dec. 15th, the 15th day being cownted
the 25, 50, 10 dayes ar imagined spent, which have crept in betwene
the day of Crist his birth regarding the place of the sonne, and
the sonnes place not the 25th day of this month, whiche a civile
æquation, but mathematically and religiusly to be substantiated to
be for the true term of the periods of annuall revolutions of the
sonne sinse the day of Christ his birth.

1583. Jan. 13th, on Sonday the stage at Paris Garden fell down all
at ones, being full of people beholding the bearbayting. Many being
killed thereby, more hart, and all amased. The godly expownd it as a
due plage of God for the wickednes ther usid, and the Sabath day so
profanely spent. Jan. 19th, Mr. John Leonard Haller went to London
and so to go toward Scotland. Jan. 23rd, the Ryght Honorable Mr.
Secretary Walsingham cam to my howse, where by good lok he found Mr.
Awdrian Gilbert, and so talk was begonne of North-west Straights
discovery. The Bishop of St. Davyd’s (Mr. Middelton) cam to visit me
with Mr. Thomas Herbert. The Lord Grey cam to Mr. Secretary, and so
they went unto Greenwich (?). Jan. 24th, I, Mr. Awdrian Gilbert, and
John Davis went by appointment to Mr. Secretary to Mr. Beale his
howse, where onely we four were secret, and we made Mr. Secretarie
privie of the N.W. passage, and all charts and rutters were agreed
uppon in generall.

Feb. 2nd, Rolandus Dee baptizatus. Feb. 3rd, Mr. Savile, Mr. Powil
the yonger, travaylors, Mr. Ottomeen his sonne, cam to be acquaynted
with me. Feb. 4th, Mr. Edmunds of the Privie Chamber, Mr. Lee who
had byn in Moschovia, cam to be acquaynted with me. Feb. 11th, the
Quene lying at Richemond went to Mr. Secretary Walsingham to dynner;
she coming by my dore gratiously called me to her, and so I went by
her horse side as far as where Mr. Hudson dwelt. Ερ μαιεστι αξεδ με
οβοσκυρελι οφ μουνσιευρἱς στατε: διξι βιοθανατος εριτ. Roland went
with his nurse to her howse to Estshene. Feb. 18th, the Lady
Walsingham cam suddenly into my howse very freely, and shortly after
that she was gone cam Syr Francys himself and Mr. Dyer. Feb. 24th,
Jane churched. Feb. 26th, I delivered my boke to the Lord Threasorer
for the correction of the Calender.[x]

  [Footnote x: This work, although never entirely printed, created
  much sensation at the time, and was the cause of considerable
  controversy among the politicians as well as literati. The
  Memorial on this subject which Dee presented to the Privy
  Council has been printed by Hearne and others, but it is not
  generally known that the original manuscript of the actual
  treatise on the correction of the Calendar is still preserved
  in Ashmole’s library, No. 1789, and is the very book which Dee
  alludes to above. It is inscribed “to the Right Honorable and my
  singular good Lorde, the Lorde Burghley, Lorde Threasorer of
  Englande,” with the following verses:--

    “Το ὁτι and το διοτι,
    I shew the thing and reason why;
    At large, in breif, in middle wise,
    I humbly give a playne advise;
    For want of tyme, the tyme untrew
    Yf I have myst, commaund anew
    Your honor may. So shall you see
    That love of truth doth govern me.”

  The work itself is entitled, “A playne Discourse and humble
  Advise for our Gratious Queene Elizabeth, her most Excellent
  Majestie to peruse and consider, as concerning the needful
  Reformation of the Vulgar Kalender for the civile yeres and
  daies accompting, or verifyeng, according to the tyme truely
  spent.”]

March 6th, I, and Mr. Adrian Gilbert and John Davis, did mete with
Mr. Alderman Barnes, Mr. Townson and Mr. Yong and Mr. Hudson, abowt
the N.W. voyage. March 17th, Mr. John Davys went to Chelsey with Mr.
Adrian Gilbert to Mr. Radforths, and so the 18th day from thence
toward Devonshyre. March 18th, Mr. North from Poland, after he had
byn with the Quene he cam to me. I receyved salutation from Alaski,
Palatine in Poland; salutation by Mr. North who cam before to the
Quene, and next to me was his message, hor. 12. Nurse Lydgatt at
Estshene was payd for 5 pound candell, 6 pound sope, and the wagis
due from Rowland his birth. April 18th, the Quene went from
Richemond toward Grenwich, and at her going on horsbak, being new
up, she called for me by Mr. Rawly his putting her in mynde, and she
sayd “quod defertur non aufertur,” and gave me her right hand to
kisse. April 24th, nurse was payd for Rowland all her wagis tyll
Monday the 22 of this month, 16 pence a weke: she had all her
candell and sope before.

May 1st, Albertus Laski, Polonus, Palatinus Scradensis, venit
Londinum.[y] May 4th, Mr. Adrian Gilbert and Mr. Pepler went by
water to Braynford, and so to ride into Devonshire. May 7th, E. K.
went toward London, and so to go homeward for 10 or 12 dayes. Dies
Quadragesimus a die Veneris ante Pascham. May 13th, I becam
acquaynted with Albertus Laski at 7½ at night, in the Erle of
Lecester his chamber in the court at Greenwich. This day was my
lease of Devonshyre mynes sealed at Sir Leonell Ducket’s hows. May
18th, the Prince Albertus Laski cam to me at Mortlake, with onely
two men. He cam at afternone and tarryed supper, and after sone set.
Nurse Rowland was payd all tyll the 20th of this month. June 15th,
abowt 5 of the clok cam the Polonian Prince Lord Albert Lasky down
from Bissham, where he had lodged the night before, being returned
from Oxford whither he had gon of purpose to see the universityes,
wher he was very honorably used and enterteyned. He had in his
company Lord Russell, Sir Philip Sydney, and other gentlemen: he was
rowed by the Quene’s men, he had the barge covered with the Quene’s
cloth, the Quene’s trumpeters, &c. He cam of purpose to do me honor,
for which God be praysed! June 19th, the Lord Albert Laski cam to me
and lay at my hows all nyght. Nurse Rowland payd her wagis ending
the 17th day of this month.

  [Footnote y: “The year of our Lorde God 1583, the laste daye of
  Aprill, the Duke or Prince of Vascos in Polonia, came to London
  and was lodged at Winchester Howse.” --MS. Douce, 363, fol. 125.
  This account differs from Dee’s by a single day.]

July 1st, Master Mills his answer of no hopes in my sute at
Grenewich. July 7th, George was dismissed my servys and payd all
reconings in the presens of goodman Hilton and Mistres Kelly in my
study. July 10th, Thomas Hoke of Cranford cam to my service, but he
went away agayn the 23 day of this month. July 30th, the Quene
removed on Tuesday from Greenwich to Sion by water; coming by my
dore.......... July 31st, the Quene’s gift of 40 angells[z] sent by
the Erle of Lecester his secretarie Mr. Lloyd, throwgh the Erle his
speche to the Quene. Mr. Rawlegh his letter unto me of hir Majesties
good disposition unto me. Aug. 1st, John Halton minister dwelling in
London with .......... bowed in and looked, and the .........
a Wurcetershire man, a wicked spy cam to my howse, whom I used as
an honest man, and found nothing wrong as I thought. I was sent to
E. K. Aug. 7th, Mr. William Burrow passed by me. Aug. 14th, payd
nurse Lydgatt for Rowland for two monthes ending the 12th day. Aug.
18th, a great tempest of wynde at mydnyght. Maxima era E. K. cum
uxore ejus. Sept. 21st, we went from Mortlake, and so the Lord
Albert Lasky, I, Mr. E. Kelly, our wives, my children and familie,
we went toward our two ships attending for us, seven or eight myle
below Gravessende.

  [Footnote z: “Her Majestie being informed by the Right
  Honourable Earle of Leicester, that whereas the same day in the
  morning he had told me that his Honour and Lord Laskey would dine
  with me within two dayes after, I confessed sincerely unto him
  that I was not able to prepare them a convenient dinner, unless
  I should presently sell some of my plate or some of my pewter
  for it. Whereupon her Majestie sent unto me very royally within
  one hour after forty angels of gold from Sion, whether her
  Majestie was now come by water from Greenwich.” --Dr. Dee’s
  Compendious Memoriall, p. 511.]

1586. July 10th, Mr. William Maynard natus hora 12 noctis, vel
paulo post, Londini. Sept. 14th, Trebonam venimus. Oct. 18th, E. K.
recessit a Trebona versus Pragam curru delatus; mansit hic per tres
hebdomadas. Nov. 8th, illustrissimus princeps versus Pragam; iter
institit hora tertia a meridie. Nov. 14th, rescripsi ad Victorem
Reinholdum. Nov. 19th, to the glas hows. Nov. 21st, Michael was
begone to be weaned. Nov. 22nd, recepi literas Jacobi Memschiti.
Dec. 8th, Monday abowt none Mr. Edward Garland cam to Trebona to
mee from the Emperor of Moschovia, according to the articles before
sent unto me by Thomas Hankinson. Dec. 11th, St. Poloniensis obiit:
natus anno 1530 die 13 Januarii, hora quarta mane min. 26, in
Transylvania. Obiit, hora secunda post mediam noctem, ut intellexi
ex literis D{ni} Lasky, receptis die 29 per Alexandrum. Dec. 19th,
19die (novi kalendarii) ad gratificandum Domino Edouardo Garlando,
et Francisco suo fratri, qui Edouardus nuncius mihi missus erat ab
Imperatore Moschoviæ ut ad illum venirem, E. K. fecit proleolem
lapidis in proportione unius ...... gravi arenæ super quod vulgaris
oz. et ½ et producta est optimi auri oz. fere: quod aurum post
distribuimus a crucibolo una dedimus Edouardo. Dec. 30th, E. K.
versus Pragam.

1587. Jan. 8th, cam Nicolas du Haut, Frenchman of Lorrayn, who had
byn lackay to my frende Otho Henrick Duke of Brunswik and Lienburgh,
to seke a servyse, being dismissed by passport from his Lord after
his long sikenes. Jan. 14th, Doctor Reinholdt of Salfeldt cam to
Trebona with Abraham. His sute of the salt. Doctor Reinholdt revisit
versus Pragam 20 die. Jan. 18th, rediit E. K. a Praga. E. K. browght
with him from the Lord Rosenberg to my wyfe a chayne and juell
estemed at 300 duckettes; 200 the juell stones, and 100 the gold.
Jan. 21st, E. K. again to Prage and so to Poland ward. Feb. 5th,
I tok a jornay of myself from Trebon to Newhowse, two myles of, to
mete my Lord to comen with him. I toke two horsemen of the cyty with
me. Feb. 9th, Illustriss.[aa] venit a Vienna ad Trebonam. Feb. 12th,
ivit Illustriss. versus Crocoviam. Feb. 19th, E. K.[bb] cam from
Poland abowt none to Trebone: I sent word to my Lord straight. Feb.
21st, my Lord sending no word yet, I sent another message. March
3rd, a Cremona ad Trebonam. March 7th, E. K. dedit nobis 300 ducata.
Recepimus a Domino Illustrissimo 3300. March 9th, iter regium.
March 14th, venimus Reichstein. March 17th, reditus a Reichstein.
March 21st, E. K. gave me 170 more, and of the 200 for changing 60
remayne. Contumelie et contemptus a Cholek et a Schonberg. March
23rd, venimus Trebonam. March 26th, the Lord Biberstein, comming
from Cranbaw from the Lord Rosenberg, passing by Trebona, sent for
me to his ynn to make acquayntance with me. E. K. equitavit
Crotoviam. April 4th, actio tertia incepit. April 18th, actionis
tertiæ finis. May 1st, vidi (doctore meo premonstrante) Michaelium
Nuncium non Mersaelem. Laus sit Deo et doctori meo E. K.! June 14th,
nuptiæ Domini Thomæ Kelei. June 17th, αφτερ θις φυλ μονε ιανε ἁδ θεμ
νοτ. June 22nd, Mr. Francis Garland went toward England from
Trebona.

  [Footnote aa: He frequently speaks of Prince Albert Leski under
  the title of Illustrissimus.]

  [Footnote bb: It is almost unnecessary to observe that these
  initials refer to Edward Kelly.]

July 5th, Sonday, I set the two erthes with theyr water agayn uppon
them. July 9th, Mr. Francis Pucci cam and browght Chrisan Franken
with him, who, he sayd, had now recanted his wycked boke against
Christ, wherof I was glad. Illustrissimus cum Domina venerat
Trebona. July 11th, colloquium inter Illustrissimum Dominum, Dominum
E. K. et me, a meridie, inter nos tres. July 13th, Francys Pacci
recessit. July 19th, a certayn kinde of recommendation between our
wives. Next day saw relenting of E. K. also by my Lord’s entrety.
July 20th, Illustrissimus abiit cum principissa sua versus
Cremoniam. Aug. 13th, amice cum Domino Edouardo Keleo de tribus
illis votis. Aug. 17th, E. K. cum fratre et Ludovico.............
Aug. 18th, we understode how E. K. went to Badwise to bed, and went
but this day at none from thence. Aug. 20th, John Basset cam to
Trebona. Aug. 23rd, Mr. E. K. cam from Lyntz fayre. Sept. 1st,
Tuesday morning, covenanted with John Basset to teach the children
the Latyn tong, and I do give him seven duckats by the quarter,
and the term to begyne this day; and so I gave him presently seven
duckatts Hungary, in gold, before my wife. God spede his work! Sept.
3rd, 4th, continua quasi pluvia per biduum istud. Sept. 4th, Basset
his hurlyburly with Mr. T. Kelly. Sept. 16th, the Lord Biberstein
cam to Trebon, and Cracht with him. Sept. 22nd, my Lord cum from
Crummow to Trebon with my Lady. Sept. 26th, my Lord went toward
Prage. Sept. 28th, I delivered to Mr. Ed. Kelley (ernestly requiring
it as his part) the half of all the animall which was made. It is to
weigh 20 ownces; he wayed it himself in my chamber: he bowght his
waights purposely for it. My Lord had spoken to me before for some,
but Mr. Kelly had not spoken. Sept. 30th, T. K. and J. C.[cc] went
toward Prage.

  [Footnote cc: That is, Thomas Kelley and John Carp.]

Oct. 12th, Mr. E. K. toward Prage on horsbak. Oct. 13th, mane paulo
ante ortum solis observavi radio astronomico inter ..... et .....
gradus 2 minuta prima 22, et erat ..... sub Tauro in eadem linea
perpendiculari ante oculum demissa super horizonta altitudo erat vix
quatuor graduum. Oct. 15th, hyred Nicolas. Oct. 20th, I toke up the
furniture for the action. Oct. 26th, Mr. Edward Kelly cam to Trebona
from Prage. Oct. 28th and 29th, John Carp did begyn to make furnaces
over the gate, and he used of my rownd bricks, and for the yern pot
was contented now to use the lesser bricks, 60 to make a furnace.
Oct. 31st, Ed. Hilton cam to Trebona in the morning. Nov. 8th,
E. K. terribilis expostulatio, accusatio, &c. hora tertia a meridie.
Nov. 17th, John Basset had seven ducketts beforehand for his second
quarter’s wages, begynning the 1st. Nov. 21st, Saterday at night Mr.
Francis Garland cam from England to Trebona and browght me a letter
from Mr. Dyer and my brother Mr. Richard. Nov. 24th, at the marriag
super Critzin the Grand Captayn disdayned to com thither to supper
in the Rad howse of Trebona becawse E. K. and I were there; and sayd
farder that we wer ............ Dec. 1st to 11th, my Lord lay at
Trebon and my Lady all this tyme. Dec. 10th, Mr. John Carpio went
toward Prage to marry the mayden he had trubbled; for the Emperor’s
Majestie, by my Lord Rosenberg’s means, had so ordred the matter.
Dec. 12th, afternone somwhat; Mr. Ed. Keley his lamp overthrow, the
spirit of wyne long spent to nere, and the glas being not stayed
with buks abowt it, as it was wont to be; and the same glas so
flitting on one side, the spirit was spilled out, and burnt all that
was on the table where it stode, lynnen and written bokes,-- as the
bok of Zacharius with the Alkanor that I translated out of French
for som by spirituall could not; Rowlaschy his thrid boke of waters
philosophicall; the boke called Angelicum Opus, all in pictures of
the work from the beginning to the end; the copy of the man of
Badwise Conclusions for the Transmution of metalls; and 40 leaves in
4º, intitled, Extractiones Dunstani, which he himself extracted and
noted out of Dunstan his boke, and the very boke of Dunstan was but
cast on the bed hard by from the table.

1588. Jan. 1st, abowt nine of the clok afternone, Michel, going
chilyshly with a sharp stik of eight ynches long and a little wax
candell light on the top of it, did fall uppon the playn bords in
Marie’s chamber, and the sharp point of the stik entred throwgh the
lid of his left ey toward the corner next the nose, and so persed
throwgh, insomuch that great abundance of blud cam out under the
lid, in the very corner of the sayd eye; the hole on the owtside is
not bygger then a pyn’s hed; it was anoynted with St. John’s oyle.
The boy slept well. God spede the rest of the cure! The next day
after it apperid that the first towch of the stikes point was at
the very myddle of the apple of the ey, and so (by God’s mercy and
favor) glanced to the place where it entred; with the strength of
his hed and the fire of his fulness, I may make some shew of it to
the prayse of God for his mercies and protection. Jan. 11th, Nicolas
was sore hart circa 8½ hora nocte. Jan. 13th, at dynner tyme Mr.
Edward Kelly sent his brother, Mr. Th. K. to me with these words,
“My brother sayth that you study so much, and therfor, seeing it is
to late to go to day to Cromlaw, he wisheth you to come to pass the
tyme with him at play.” I went after dynner and playd, he and I
against Mr. F. Gore and Mr. Rob tyll supper tyme, in his dynyng
rome: and after supper he cam and the others, and we playd there two
or three howres, and frendely departed. This was then after the
great and wonderful unkindnes used toward me in taking my man. Jan.
14th, Mr. Edward Kelly rid to Crumlow, being sent for by my Lord.
I receyved a letter from the Lord Chamberlain. Jan. 18th, Mistres
Lidda K. had an abortion of a girle of 5 or 6 monthes; she was mery
and well till the night before; I helped to finde the dead birthe
within one howr after I had caused her to have myrh given unto
her in wyne warmed, the quarter of a ounce; better after she
was discharged of the secondyne, and all at ones. The woman was
sufficiently strong after. Jan. 19th, Mr. E. K. cam from Crumlow.
Feb. 4th, Mr. Francys Garland and his brother Robert went from
Trebona to go toward England: I wrote to Mr. Dyer and Mr. Yonge.
Feb. 8th, Mr. E. K. at nine of the clok afternone sent for me to his
laboratory over the gate to se how he distilled sericon, according
as in tyme past and of late he hard of me out of Riplay. God lend
his hart to all charity and virtue! Feb. 16th, John Carpe cam to
Trebon after his marriage. Feb. 19th, Mr. E. K. did δισκλοσε σομ,
ακκουντεδ μι φρενδες, ὁυυ υντρυ θει υυερ. Feb. 28th, mane paulo ante
ortum solis natus est Theodoras Trebonianus Dee, ascendente Sirio in
horoscopo, die dominica. March 1st, baptisatus erat Theodoras Dee
Trebonæ ante meridiem. March 6th, I went to Newhous and dyned at the
castell. March 12th, my Lord cam to Trebona and my Lady. March 24th,
Mr. K. put the glas in dung. March 26th, my Lord sent one of his
secretaries with answer to my letter, and with offer and promys of
all where he can pleasure me, circa 5 post meridiem. March 29th, my
Lord and Lady from Trebon toward Crumlow. The midwife’s husbond’s
name of Newhowse is David Peregrinus, perhaps of the familie of
Petrus Peregrinus, otherwise called Peter of Maharncourt, of
Picardy.

April 3rd, Mr. Pucci disquietted Mr. E. K. abowt requesting an
action, to which he had one of our six monthes actions, being now
the term begynning the fourth day of this month. The ende of our
talke was a strange spech of Mr. Kelly to Fr. Puccy. After 15 wekes
write to me, and I will answer you. April 6th, Edmond Hilton went
from Trebona toward Prage with Mr. John Carpe, and so toward
England. April 10th, I writ to Mr. Edward Kelly and to Mistres Kelly
ij. charitable letters, requiring at theyr hands mutual charity.
I went to Mr. Captain Chritzin, to know if he were offended to me,
who in outward shew used me reasonably curteously. April 12th, my wife
churched, and we receyved the communion. John Carpe browght his wife
from Prage to Trebona. April 17th, Doctor Reinholt cam to Trebona.
April 22nd, nocte hora 9 terribilis et falsa accusatio vel suspicio,
quod Puccia annunciavit contra D. K. et ipsum principia (?). May
1st, Mr. Carpio rid to my Lord to the holy well at the glass hows,
four myles from Trebona, with my letters of purgation for Puccies
his attempts or intents in his letters to my bond and Mr. Kelly,
unknown to me. May 4th, Mr. Carpio browght me word of my Lord’s
displeasure, conveyed and confirmed by cozen Pully his letters. Deus
ille sit propitius! May 7th, post afflictionem magnam meam, mei
misertus est Deus! Puccia, die eodem venerunt literæ Principis ad
Dominum E. K., quæ dies declarabat amici sui infamum meum ne
dignitatem: sed non reddebatur nisi, valde præfex, valde erat
ingratæ ille literæ ipsi Domino E. K. Misericordia Dei magna! Omne
quod vivit laudet Deum! Hæc est dies quam fecit Dominus! May 10th,
E. K. did open the great secret to me, God be thanked! May 19th,
hora 10 cum circumstantiis necessariis. May 22nd, Mistris Kelly
received the sacrament, and to me and my wife gave her hand in
charity; and we rushed not from her. May 30th, Michael was sik of an
ague, and Mr. Kelly likewise. June 4th, the howses burnt at Trebon
in the morning early on Whitsonday. June 8th, Illustrissimus venit
Trebonam. June 11th, Illustrissimus recessit in Dominica a Trebona
versus Pragam. My Lord sent Critzin with his compliments unto me,
and to offer me help, hora prima a meridie. A letter cam from T. G.
of Mr. Dyer, his being three myle from Trebona, but it was not so.
Mr. Dier sent word by Francis Garland wher. June 13th, cam Francis
Garland and Mr. Edmond Cooper, brother to Mistris Kelly, to Trebona.
June 16th, Francis Garland went to fynde and bring Mr. Dier. June
19th, I had a grudging of the ague. June 22nd, I did evydently
receive the ague, and layd down.

July 7th, Mr. Thomas Sowthwell cam to Trebona to visit us. July
17th, Mr. Thomas Sowthwell of his own courteous nature did labor
with Mr. Edmond Cowper and indirectly with Mistres Kelly for to
furder charity and frendship among us. July 20th, Mr. Dier cam to
Trebona, July 22nd, a meridie circa 10 Mr. Edward διερ διδ ινιυριε
με υνκινδελε. July 23rd, reconciliatio bona cum Magistro διερ υυιθ
υυυρδς φακτο μεδιαντε E. K. Aug. 1st, Mr. Harry Maynard natus nocte
circa horam 11 Mortlak. Aug. 4th, Illustrissimus cam from Crachovia
to Trebon, and there on Friday before dynner cam up Mr. Dyer, who
lay in my chamber, and entertayned him honorably. Aug. 5th, after
dynner the little boy, sonne to the Captayn of Rhaudnitz, hurt
Arthur’s nose with a raser, not in anger but by chance wantonly.
Aug. 6th, my Lord and Lady went toward Prage. Aug. 7th, this day I
covenanted and hyred John Hammond, jentleman, to serve me in his
honest servyces for one yere, and to have 30 dolers for his full and
all manner of wages. Aug. 9th, Tuesday, Mr. Dyer went from Trebon,
having in company Mr. Edmond Cowper, Francys Garland, and his man
Rowley. Aug. 13th, Mr. Thomas Sowthwell ryd to Prag ward from
Trebon. He told us of the philosopher (his scholemaster to write)
whose name was Mr. Swyft, who gave him a lump of the philosopher’s
stone so big as his fist: a Jesuit named Mr. Stale had it of him.
Aug. 14th, Mr. Sowthwell cam againe. Aug. 24th, vidi divinam aquam
demonstratione magnifici domini et amici mei incomparabilis D. Ed.
Kelei ante meridiem tertia hora. Aug. 27th, John Basset (so namyng
himself) otherwise truely named Edward Whitlok, under pretence of
going to Budweiss to buy cullors and so to return agayn, did convey
himselfe from my servyce of teaching Arthur grammer. Sept. 3rd,
my lord and lady cam to Trebon. Sept. 12th, spes confirmata. Sept.
15th, the Lord Chamberlain cam to Trebona, and went away on the
17th. The rancor and dissimulation now evident to me, God deliver
me! I was not sent for.

Oct. 17th, Mystres Kelly and the rest rode toward Punchartz in the
morning. Oct. 18th, my Lord and my Lady ryd toward Ctumnate. Oct.
25th, Mr. Ed. Kelley and John Carpio rode toward Prage: this night
to Wesely, two myles. Nov. 5th, I dreamed that the toth next my top
toth skarse cold hang in my hed, the toth on the right side above.
Nov. 6th, Mr. Kelly cam home from Prage and Mr. Francys Garland, and
Edward Rolls with him from Eglis. Nov. 15th, in the fornone, snow
and close clowdy. Nov. 16th, the Lord and Lady Rosenberg cam from
Crummedo to Trebon in the evening. Nov. 20th, this Sonday before
dynner the Lord and Lady Rosenberg went from Trebon toward Prage.
Nov. 23rd, Mr. Francis Garland and Edward Rowly, Mr. Dyer his
servant, went from Trebon toward England. I writ to the Quene’s
Majestie, Mr. Dyer, Mr. Yong, and Edward Hilton. Dec. 4th, I gave to
Mr. Ed. Kelley my Glass, so highly and long estemed of our Quene,
and the Emperor Randolph the second, de quo in præfatione Euclidis
fit mentio.[dd] The letter of 500,000 ducats required. Dec. 7th,
γρεατ φρενδκιπ προμισιδ φορ μανι, ανδ τυυο ουνκες οφ θε θινγ. Dec.
13th, Mr. Edward Kelley gave me the water, erth and all. Dec. 14th,
Edmond Hilton cam again to Trebon from England. Dec. 18th, I did
understand by Mr. Kelley that my glass which he had given to my Lord
Rosenberg, the Lord Rosenberg had given it to the Emperor. Dec.
23rd, I went to the new made citie Kaiser Radnef Stadt, by Budneis,
to ovirsee what Joachim Reimer had done abowt my coaches making.
Radulphus Sagiensis Gallus Normannus, venit Trebonam, chimiæ et
naturalis magiæ studiosus.

  [Footnote dd: This refers to the earliest English translation of
  Euclid by Billingsley, which was published in 1570, with a long
  preface by Dr. Dee. Professor De Morgan is of opinion that the
  translation also was by Dee, or that Billingsley may have been
  only a pupil who worked immediately under his directions. The
  passage to which Dee alludes is as follows:-- “a man to be
  curstly affrayed of his owne shadow; yea, so much to feare, that
  if you, being alone nere a certaine glasse, and proffer, with
  dagger or sword, to foyne at the glasse, you shall suddenly be
  moved to give backe (in maner) by reason of an image appearing
  in the ayre betwene you and the glasse with like hand, sword,
  or dagger, and with like quicknes, foyning at your very eye,
  likewise as you do at the glasse. Straunge this is to heare of,
  but more mervailous to behold then these my wordes cam signifie;
  and neverthelesse by demonstration opticall the order and cause
  therof is certified; even so, as the effect is consequent.”
  I refer the reader also to Mr. Barlow’s History of Optics in the
  Encyclopedia Metropolitana.]

1589. Jan. 3rd, Rudolphus Sagiensis Normannus recessit versus
Pragam. Jan. 17th, the humming in my eares began. Jan. 19th, circa
undecimam noctis abortiebatur Domina Lydda uxor D. Thomæ Kelly ex
duobus masculis vix sex mensium, et anno precedente hoc ejusdem uxor
abortiebatur puella. Jan. 20th, Mr. Kelly showed me the Lord
Rosenberg his letter; when he wrot that of me he hard no more of my
going hens, and if Menschik hath not performed as he willed him,
that if I send him word he will so dispatch me that therby I shall
not nede to stay here, as he had confidently heretofore warned Mr.
Kelley, so now he did request him to take leve of me at my
departure. And then Mr. Kelly did loke and truly confess that my
.... Jan. 25th, Mr. Mains cam to visit us; the Erle of Schwiczenbagh
thre sones. Jan. 31st, Tuesday, I sent Edmond Hilton to Prage, and
Zacharias Mathias of Buelweiss, to buy 10 or 12 coach horses and
saddell horses for 300 dollers. Feb. 4th, I delivered to Mr. Kelley
the powder, the bokes, the glas and the bone, for the Lord
Rosenberg; and he thereuppon gave me dischardg in writing of his own
hand subscribed and sealed. Feb. 12th, Edmond Hilton cam from Prage
with nine Hungarian horses bowght toward our jornay. Feb. 16th, Mr.
Edward Kelley rode toward Prage after none, John Carpio, Edmond
Hilton, Henry Garlande, Thomas Simkinson, Lodovik. March 11th, from
Trebon in Bohemia. March 18th, to Nuremberg. March 20th, from
Nuremberg. March 26th, to Frankfurt on the Mane.

April 19th, to Breme. May 1st, Katharin by a blow on the eare given
by her mother did bled at the nose very much, which did stay for an
howre and more; afterward she did walk into the town with nurse;
upon her coming home she bled agayn. May 11th, John of Gloles cam to
Breme. May 13th, I cam to lie at my hyred hows. May 17th, the three
saddle horse put to grass to the town meddowes for nine ducets tyll
Mychelmas. May 21st, the Landgrave of Hesse his letters to me and
the city of Breme. May 25th, I sent the Lantgrave my twelve
Hungarish horses. June 2rd and 13th, Mr. Duerend and Mr. Hart went
toward Stade. They had scaped from the Spanish servise in Flanders
with Syr William Stanley. June 6th, Dr. Kenrich Khanradt of Hamburgh
visitted me. Mr. Thomas Kelly his wife, Francis Garland, Rolls,
from Standen toward England. June 16th, Edmund Hilton toward Prage.
June 19th, Hans of Glotz went toward Standen, and so toward England.
June 23rd, Mr. Daniel van der Multon cam to me. Ultima die mensis
istius circa meridiem maximi imbres, tonitrua, grandines.

July 6th, Thursday the 26th of June (by the old accownt and the 6th
of July by new accownt) Mr. Hart, the minister of the English
company, and Mr....... the governor’s deputy of the English company
at Stade, did visit me at my howse in Breme. July 18th, Mr. Yong and
Mr. Secretary his letter. July 30th, Edmond Hilton cam from Prage to
Breme by Stade. Aug. 2nd, veteri stilo, the nyght following, my
terrible dream that Mr. Kelly wold by force bereave me of my bokes,
toward daybreak. Aug. 5th, novo stylo, Edmond Hilton went toward
Stade, to go toward England, with my letters to disclose the treason
of Perkins. Ther went in this company two English people, Mr. Rolous
Tattin and George Losin. Aug. 7th, the first of the seven half
fasts. Aug. 14th, Theodor wened. Aug. 21st, John Hammond to Stade.
Aug. 22nd, natus William Hazilwood mane hora sexta fere, forte hora
5 min. 45, by Maydston in Kent. Sept. 9th, Roger his serviceable
letters of the Lord Rosenberg. Sept. 12th, the wynde cam East after
five wekes most part West. Sept. 16th, ante meridiem hora 9 in
delinquiciis A. C. incidi ex ingratitudine concepta ex verbis
uxoris, et Anallæ Mariæ. Sept. 22nd, stilo veteri, I delivered to
Mr. Jacob for England by Embden my letters.

Oct. 3rd, D. Witischindi his hard dealings with me: he bad Mr.
Harper the Secretary to give me warning of my howse. Oct. 9th,
warned out of my howse hora prima a meridie. Oct. 14th, John Hanward
gave me warning that he desyred to go travayle toward Italy; but
first to Master Kelly of whome he hoped to have good help. Oct.
17th, Mr. Sowthwell and Mr. Gawyne Smyth cam to me to Bream. Oct.
23rd, Mr. Sowthwell and Mr. Smyth went from Bream. Oct. 29th,
Wenefrida Goose inter 9 et 10 a meridie. Oct 31st, letters sent to
Stade for Gerwein Greven for her Majestie, Mr. Yong, and Mr. Dyer.
Nov. 1st, newes of Mr. Dyer sent ambassador to Denmarke. Nov. 3rd,
stilo veteri, I resolved to go into England, hoping to mete Mr.
Edward Kelly at Stade, going also into England; and that I suspected
uppon Mr. Secretary Walsingham his letters. Nov. 13th, Edmond Hilton
and his brother from England, and John a Glotz. Nov. 17th, die lunæ,
I met Mr. Dyer comming to Stade, even in the myddle of the town.
Nov. 18th, Edmond to Stade ward. Nov. 19th, toke ship by the
Vineyard. Dec. 2nd, we cam into the Tems to Gravesende. Dec. 3rd,
from the ship to Stratford to Mr. Yong’s howse. Dec. 19th, at
Richemond with the Queene’s Majestie.[ee] Dec. 20th, agreed for my
howse with Nicolas Fromonds to occupy as a tenant with better order.
Dec. 25th, I lay this night first at my howse. Dec. 29th, Mr. Adrian
Gilbert cam to me to Mortlak, and offred me as much as I could
require at his hands, both for my goods carryed away, and for the
mynes.

  [Footnote ee: Where, according to Aubrey, who received his
  information from Lilly, he was very favourably received by her
  Majesty.]

1590. Jan. 15th, a terrible tempest of wind, South by West. Jan.
23rd, Mr. Thomas Kelly cam from Brainford; put me in good hope of
Sir Edward Kelly his returning: offered me the loane of ten pownds
in gold, and afterward sent it me in Hungary new ducketes by John
Croker, the same evening. Jan. 26th, I writt to Mr. Adrian Gilbert
two letters. I resolved of the order to be offred for agreement with
Nicholas Fromonds for my howse and goodes. The 5th of March (by old
accownt) was Madinia Newton, my daughter, christened at Mortlak;
godfather, Sir George Cary; godmothers, the Lady Cobham and the Lady
Walsingham. March 12th, Mrs. Anne Deny born betweene 8 and 9
afternoone. March 14th, Mr. Dyer cam home from Stade. March 17th,
Sir Edward Kelly his letter by Francis Garland. March 21st, Sir
George Gary cam to Mortlak. March 27th, Jane apprehended hora quinta
a meridie.[ff] My children at this Lady Day in Lent, began to go to
schole at Mortlak with the scholemaster Mr. Lee: I gave him his
howse-rent and forty shillings yerely for my three sons and my
doughter. The howse-rent was allmost 4_s._ yerely of Mr. Fisher his
new howse. April 7th, John Spenser cam to me, from Venys new
returned, and told me of the Venetian philosopher and the goodnes of
his gold. April 16th, good Sir Francis Walsingham died at night hora
undecima. April 19th, I delivered my letters to Mr. Thomas Kelley
for his brother Sir Edward Kelley, knight, at the Emperor’s court at
Prage. Francys Garland was by, and Mr. Thomas Kelley his wife. God
send them well thither and hither agayn! Mr. Emery had disbursed to
me frankly betwene the tyme from Shrovetyde tyll this May £25. May
5th, Mr. Thomas Jack restored unto me part of my magnes stone. May
8th, I received 20 mark from Sir Richard Lagney, of Longlernay. May
16th, I gave Mr. Lee the scholemaster 5_s._ in part of wages. May
18th, the two gentlemen, the unckle Mr. Richard Candish, and his
nephew the most famous Mr. Thomas Candish,[gg] who had sayled rownd
abowt the world, did viset me at Mortlake. May 20th, after dynner,
I with my brother, Mr. Justice Yong, went to the Archebishop of
Canterbury to Lambeth, abowt the personagis who used me well. May
21st, I showed my indignation against Bacchus feast at Braynferd
intended; gave the Bishop of London warning, who toke it in very
good part. Katharyne, my dowghter, was put to Mistres Brayce at
Braynferd, hir mother and Arthur went with her after dynner. May
23rd, I lent to goodman Dalton, the carpenter, xx_s._ for a month.
May 29th, 30th, bona nova de industria Domini Richardi Candishii,
cum Regina et Archiepiscopo et Domino Georgio Carey, de propositione
Etonensis Collegii obtinendi legem. He sent me a hogshed of claret
wyne as a gyft. The Lady Cobham sent my wyfe suger and pepper, &c.
June 2nd, I writ to Syr Edward Kelly by Mr. William Fowler,
merchant, dwelling by Ledenhall. June 3rd, I was very sik uppon two
or thre sage leaves eten in the morning; better suddenly at night;
when I cast them up, I was well. The pump taken out and the well
skoured. June 5th, Thomas Hankinson and Antony my man cam from
beyond the seas to Mortlak. June 5th, terrible yll newes of Edward
Kelly against me. June 24th, £20 of Mr. Candish by Edward Hilton.
June 28th, I payd Mr. Hudson for all his corn, and also for the wood
tyll May, receyved synce I cam home.

  [Footnote ff: There are a great many brief notices in this
  diary relative to Jane Dee, most of which are expressed in
  astrological symbols; and as they are exceedingly difficult to
  decipher satisfactorily, and are certainly of very little, if
  any importance, I have thought it expedient to omit them. The
  entry of “Ιανε ἁδ θεμ” is also of frequent occurrence, though
  what “θεμ” can refer to I have not been able to discover.]

    [Transcriber’s Note:
    See diary entries for June 17th, 1587, and February 28th, 1588.]

  [Footnote gg: Dee has preserved several interesting notices
  of his intimacies with the principal navigators of his time.
  A general reference to Hackluyt will be sufficient.]

July 6th, Mr. Stockden was all payd for his wood 40_s._ I gave the
scholemaster Mr. Lee 5_s._ in part of wagis: he browght me my hammer
from Mr. Jak, so he hath a quarter’s wagis 10_s._ July 8th, I
receyved Sir Edward Kelly his letters, dated at Prage the 24th of
May stylo novo. No mention is made of his brother Mr. Thomas Kelly
coming over. July 10th, the executor of the Lady Ducket requered the
det. July 11th, I payd nurse Barwik 12_s._ for ii. monthis wagis for
Madinia: so she is payd for five monthes.

July 13th, I went to the Archbishop of Canterbury: talked with him
boldly of my right to the personages, and to the treatise of Sir
Edward Kelley his Alchimy. July 14th, Mr. Gawayn Smyth spake
frendely for me to the Quene, and she disclosed her favor toward me.
July 16th, my mynde was somewhat bent to deale with my alchimicall
exercises. July 25th, I writ a letter of thanks to the Lord
Threasorer by Edmond Hilton. I sent the Lord Chancellor his letters
from Brunswyk, of Conrad Nettlebronner his ill behaviour. July 31st,
I gave Mr. Richard Candish the copy of Paracelsus twelve lettres,
written in French with my own hand; and he promised me, before my
wife, never to disclose to any that he hath it; and that yf he dye
before me he will restore it agayn to me; but if I dy befor him,
that he shall deliver it to one of my sonnes, most fit among them to
have it. Theoddor had a sore fall on his mowth at mid-day. Aug. 2nd,
Mrs. Stoner’s sonne born circa horam tertiam a meridie. Nurs her
great affliction of mynde. Aug. 5th, Rowland fell into the Tems over
hed and eares abowt noone or somewhat after. Aug. 8th, I gave Nurse
Barwick six shillings, so she is payd for the half yere due on
Weynsday next. Aug. 9th, I payd to Mr. Lee the scholemaster 5_s._
Aug. 22nd, Ann my nurse had long byn tempted by a wycked spirit: but
this day it was evident how she was possessed of him. God is, hath
byn, and shall be her protector and deliverer! Amen. Aug. 25th, Anne
Frank was sorowfol, well comforted and stayed in God’s mercyes
acknowledging. Aug. 26th, at night I anoynted (in the name of Jesus)
Ann Frank her brest with the holy oyle. Aug. 30th, in the morning
she required to be anoynted, and I did very devowtly prepare myself,
and pray for vertue and powr and Christ his blessing of the oyle to
the expulsion of the wycked; and then twyse anoynted, the wycked one
did resest a while. Sept. 1st, I receyved letters from Sir Edward
Kelley by Francis Garland. Sept. 8th, Nurse Anne Frank wold have
drowned hirself in my well, but by divine Providence I cam to take
her up befor she was overcome of the water. Sept. 23rd, Sonday,
I gave Nurse Barwyk six shillings for a monthis wages to ende on
Wensday comme a fortnight; Mrs. Stackden was by. Sept. 29th, Nurse
Anne Frank most miserably did cut her owne throte, afternone abowt
four of the clok, pretending to be in prayer before her keeper, and
suddenly and very quickly rising from prayer, and going toward her
chamber, as the mayden her keper thowght, but indede straight way
down the stayrs into the hall of the other howse, behinde the doore,
did that horrible act; and the mayden who wayted on her at the
stayr-fote followed, her, and missed to fynde her in three or fowr
places, tyll at length she hard her rattle in her owne blud.

Oct. 11th, Mr. Cumber cam to me. Oct. 14th, payd Nurse Barwik six
shillings for one month ending on the seventh, being Wensday. Oct.
15th, this afternoone and all the night following a great storme of
wynde at North-West. One Prychard that had marryed Proctor Lewes his
widdow, demaunded £24 of me uppon an obligation of £64: whereof by
the very note on the bak of the same £48 is payd, so that £16 only
remayne and not £24, as he unduely demanded: which £16 I challenged
for the costes of his sonne John, three yeres and longer being with
me in Mortlak, and having also his lerning free. Notwithstanding my
wife afraid payd a pownd or two to Mr. Lewys of that £16, and yet
Prichard will go to law. Nov. 12th, the Archbishop of Canterbury
gave me £5 in ryalls and angels circa horam decimam matutina. Nov.
20th, Her Majestie cam to Richemond. Nov. 27th, the Quene’s
Majestie, being at Richemont, graciously sent for me. I cam to her
at three quarters of the clok afternone, and she sayd she wold send
me something to kepe Christmas with. Nov. 28th, Mr. Candish on
Saterday gave my wife forty shillings, and on Tuesday after sent £10
in ryalls and angels, and before he sent me £20, £32 in all. My
cousin Mr. Thomas Junes cam in the ende of the terme about St.
Andrew’s even. Dec. 1st, Her Majestie commaunded Mr. John Herbert,
Master of Requests, to write to the Commissioners in my behalf. Dec.
2nd, order taken by the Commissioners for my howse and goods. Her
Majesty told Mr. Candish that she wold send me an hundred angels to
kepe my Christmas withall. Dec. 3rd, goodwife Tyndale payd for
Antony his lodging for eleven wekes dew at his going away 5_s._
6_d._, and before she had for seven wekes. Dec. 4th, the Quene’s
Majestie called for me at my dore circa 3½ a meridie as she passed
by, and I met her at Estshene gate, where she graciously, putting
down her mask, did say with mery chere, “I thank thee, Dee; there
was never promisse made but it was broken or kept.” I understode her
Majesty to mean of the hundred angels she promised to have sent me
this day, as she yester-night told Mr. Richard Candish. Dec. 6th,
Mr. Thomas Griffith my cosen from Llanbeder cam to see me, and lay
all night with me, and allso Mr. Thomas Jones, and in the Monday
morning went by water to London, and so the same day homeward.
A meridie circa 3ª recepi a Regina Domina £50. Dec. 8th, at Chelsey
disputing with Doctor Mather, bishop of Bristow; in danger of water
hora 5½ I stayed at Chelsey. Dec. 14th, the Quene’s Majestie called
for me at my dore as she rod by to take ayre, and I met her at
Estshene gate. Dec. 16th, Mr. Candish receyved from the Quene’s
Majestie warrant by word of mowth to assure me to do what I wold in
philosophie and alchimie, and none shold chek, controll, or molest
me; and she sayd that she wold ere long send me £50 more to make up
the hundred pound. I gave Mr. Candish the Bishop of Scotland his
conclusion with marchaunts. Mr. Candish went from Mortlak at four of
clok at nyght toward London and so into Suffolk. Dec. 18th, Mr.
Robert Maynard natus circa horam decimam antei meridiem Londini.

1591. Jan. 21st, utterly put owt of hope for recovering the two
parsonages[hh] by the Lord Archbishop and the Lord Threasorer. Feb.
13th, Bartilmew cam up. March 2th, borrowed £20 uppon plate and payd
this day £19 in Mortlak. March 21st, remember that on Passion
Sunday, being the 21st of March by our accownt, all things was payd
for to Mr. Thomas Hudson for wood and corne, abowt £14, at his howse
when he was syk of the strangury. Allso to godman Bedell was payd £4
for billet, baven, and lose fagot the same day. Payd likewise to
gudwife Wesder eight shillings for one monthes nursing of Madinia,
and 4_s._ more beforehande. March 26th, Mr. Beale sent me home
the first my own hand copy of the volume of Famous and Rich
Discoveries[ii] which I had given anno 1583 to Andrew Strange.

  [Footnote hh: See the “Compendious Rehearsall,” published by
  Hearne from a Manuscript in the Cottonian collection, now
  partially destroyed by fire, for a more extended account of this.]

  [Footnote ii: Now in the Cottonian collection. Ashmole has
  preserved a copy of it in MS. Ashm. 1790.]

May 12th, I payd goodwife Welder xij_s._ for vij. wekes ending then
next from the Wensday before Ester-day last. May 25th, of the old
Kalander, Sir Thomas Jones Knight (unaxed) offred me his castell of
Emlyn in Wales to dwell in so long as he had any interest in it,
whose lease dureth yet twelve yeres, freely, with commodityes
adjoining unto it; and allso to have as much mow land for rent, as
myght pleasure me sufficiently. The 27th day he confirmed the same
his offer agayn before Mr. John Harbert, Master of the Requestes,
in his hall in Mortlak; which his offers I did accept of, and he was
glad thereof. May 31st, Bartilmew [Hickman] cam up and browght Jane
his dowghter with him. Mr. R. Ed. his boke and letter. June 8th,
William Aspland of Essex and Th. Collen. June 12th, lent Chronica
Hollandiæ Magna to Mr. Beale on Saterday manuscript, which Mr. Webb
lent me. June 14th, Jane Hikman to goodwife Tyndall’s to lern. June
27th, Arthur wownded on his hed by his own wanton throwing of a
brik-bat upright, and not well avoyding the fall of it agayn, at Mr.
Harberts abowt sonn-setting. The half-brik weighed 2½ lb. June 30,
Madinia was taken home from goodwife Welder.

July 28th, Mr. Dyer sent me xx. angels by Mr. Thomas Webbes. July
30th, reconciliation betweene Mr. Dyer and me solemnized the
afternone on Friday, and on Saterday (the 31st) all day tyll my
going by boat at Mr. Webb’s lodging at Rochester Howse. July 31st,
by old Kalender, abowt an eleven of the clok Jane was at London very
faynt syke, redy to swownd, and in a faynt swete. It was thowght
that then she quickened. The last of Julie, Saterday by the old
accownt, Barthelmew cam up; he went down on Tuesday, the 3rd day of
August, from Mortlak. Aug. 2nd, Monday, Mr. William Diggs his
philosophicall curtesy all day. Sept. 22nd, Madinia fell from the
bed and hurt her forhed abowt one of the clok afternone. Oct. 15th,
after midnight very wyndy northerly. Oct. 23rd, a storm of wynde
S.W. afternone. Dec. 3rd, wyndie S.W. Dec. 14th, I had a very jentle
answer at the Lord Thresorer’s hand hora decima ante meridiem at the
court of Whitehall. Dec. 20th, a jentle answer of the Lord
Threasorer that the Quene wold have me have something at this
promotion of bishops at hand.

1592. Jan. 1st, my dowghter Francys borne on New Yeres day at the
sun-rising exactly. Jan. 2nd, Barthilmew and his brother Ambrose cam
this Sonday to Mortlak. Jan. 9th, Francys christened afternone.
Francys went with her nurse to Barne Elms. Mr. Edward Maynard borne
in the morning betwene 2 and 3 after mydnight. Arthur fell into a
quotidian jentle ague at 9 of the clok in the morning as he was at
the servyce in the hall. Jan. 24th, Mr. Thomas Oliver becam
acquaynted with me at Mortlak. March 6th, the Quene granted my sute
to Dr. Awbrey. March 9th, the pryvy seale at night. March 16th, the
great seale. March 18th, Arthur and Katharine were let blud at
London by Doctor Dodding’s cownsayle. March 24th, £25 Mr. Tho.
Mownson. March 25th, I payd £10 to Nicholas Fromonds paulo ante
solis occasum, when he most abhominably revyled me. March 30th, on
Thursday Mr. Saunders of Ewell sent home my great sea cumpas, but
without a nedle; it cam in the night by water.

April 5th, the Lady Russell robbed a little after mydnight of
perles, diamands, &c. One John Smyth is suspected, a yong man of
thirty yeres old, very ingenious in many handyworkes, melancholek.
April 8th, Richard cam to my servyce, 40_s._ yerely and a livery.
April 9th, 10th, agreed with my brother Nicholas Fromonds with Mr.
Webbs, at 8 of the clok on Wensday night, and 8 on Tuesday night.
April 14th, Winifrede Goose, wife of goodman Goose of Tuddington,
dowghter of Harry Wyse, eviley tempted, cam to me with her sister.
April 16th, δε θεσαυρο α βοκ. April 27th, filius Mariæ Nevell hora
3½ a meridie et aliquantus tardus by Chichester. May 3rd, Wensday,
at 10 of the clok Arthur was put to Westmynster Schole under Mr.
Grant and Mr. Camden. May 11th, I borowed ten pound of Master Thomas
Smith to be paid at Christmas next. May 12th, great wynde at north.
May 15th, Marian cam again a meridie hora septima. May 16th, I rode
to Harfelde to the Lord Anderson, Lord Justice of the Common Pleas,
12 myles off. May 25th, hora sexta a meridie mowght have byn a
quarell betwene Mr. Web and Mr. Morgan with one eye for £4. left
unpayd uppon a bill. June 16th, Sir John Perrot judged to be drawn,
hanged, and quartered.

July 23rd, at Grenwich abowt mydnight following this day began the
first evydent shew of my grief of kidneys; whereuppon Doctor Giffard
caused me to have a glyster, and so the next day I was easid of
my grief. July 29th, Robert Theneth of Rushmer by Ypswych made
acquaintance with me: he told me of Mr. Carter a man of 80 yeres old
in Yorkshyre. Aug. 6th, I went to Nonsuch to the court, wyder the
Countess of Warwik sent me word by Mr. Ferdinando of the Quene’s
gratious speches at St. Crosses, and the Lord Archbishop told me the
like. Aug. 8th, after the midnight of Monday, being the 7th day, the
second fytt of the stone in my kydnes did molest me for 6 or 7
howres. Aug. 9th, the Lord Threasorer invited me to dynner at Mr.
Maynards at Mortlak, where Sir Robert Cecill and Sir Thomas Cisell
and his lady wer allso. The Lord Threasorer allso sent me some
venison to supper. He invited me to dynner allso the tenth day,
where the Lord Cobham cam also to dynner, and after dynner he
requested the Lord Threasorer to help me to St. Crosses, which he
promised to do his best in. Aug. 11th, Mr. Kemp of Micheam, my old
acquayntance, abowt an eleven of clok (allmost) before none, told me
of the rare appearing. Aug. 17th, I went to Micheam to Mr. Kemp.
Aug. 21st, I went to the Lord Cobham and the Lady Cobham to London.
Aug. 23rd, Mr. Cholmely and his mayde ante meridiem hor. 11½. The
humor so suddenly falling into the calf of my left leg as if a stone
had hit me. Aug. 26th, Mr. Heriot 40_s._[kk] Auditor Hill, £4.
Remember all thing is payd to our nurse at Barnes for the girle
Francys Dee from hir birth untyll the ende of her eight month,
lacking 12_s._, and on Sunday, the 27th of this August, we so
concluded, when we gave the nurse ten shillings. The eight month
ended (from Newyere’s day morning last) the 12th of this month.
Sept. 4th, 5th, 6th, very tempestuous, windy at West, Sowtherly.
Sept. 5th, the Tems very shallow at London. Sept. 6th, goodman
Warryn of Marketharborogh. Robert Web cam from Mr. Ponsoys to write,
and is to com agayn within thre wekes. Sept. 7th, Robert Charles of
Northamptonchyre and goodman Warren of Marketharborow in my howse at
Mortlak promised me to help Barthilmew Hikman with £12 to pay on
Michelmas Day next to discharge the bond for his brother-in-law.
This they promised uppon condition I wold be bownd to them to see
them repayd agayn. I sent a letter to Sir Robert Thaneth to Rushmer
by Ypswych by the wagonman who is at ynn at the George in Lombard
Streete. He sayd that Robert Thaneth was at home and well. Sept.
19th, I had on the Sunday abowt 7 of the clok afternone the cramp
most extremely in the very centre of the calves of both my legs, and
in the place where I had the suddeyn grief on Bartilmew-even last I
had payn so intollerable as yf the vaynes or artheries wold have
broken by extreme stretching, or how els I cannot tell. The payn
lasted abowt half a quarter of an howr. I toke my purgation of six
grayns. I began in the morning to drink the drink for the stone in
the kydney. Sept. 28th, Mr. Laiesley promised me ten shepe and four
quarters of wheat. Sept. 30th, Elizabeth Denby went from me to
Mistres Herberts’ to servyce.

  [Footnote kk: This entry is not very clear. It either refers
  perhaps to Harriot, the celebrated mathematician, or to the
  London goldsmith whom the Abbotsford novelist has immortalized.]

Oct. 13th, I exhibited to the Archbishop of Canterbury two bokes of
blasphemie against Christ and the Holy Ghoste, desyring him to cause
them to be confuted: one was Christian Franken, printed anno 1585 in
Poland; the other was of one Sombius against one Carolius, printed
at Ingolstad anno 1582 in octavo. Oct. 14th, 15th, a mighty wynde at
sowth-west. Oct. 30th, 31st, one of these two dayes I hurt my left
shyn against the sharp small end of a wooden rammar abowt four of
the clok afternone. Nov. 1st, Mr. Ashly, his wife, and their
familie, did com to my howse and remayned ther. They had my mother’s
chamber, the mayde’s chamber, and all the other howse. Nov. 9th, Her
Majestie’s grant of my supplication for commissioners to comme to
me. The Lady Warwik obteyned it. Nov. 22nd, the commissioners from
Her Majestie, Mr. Secretary Wolly and Sir Thomas George, cam to
Mortlak to my howse. Nov. 28th, to Richard Walkdyne of his wagis
20_s._ Dec. 1st, a little after none the very vertuous Cowntess of
Warwik sent me word very speedily by hir gentleman Mr. Jones from
the cowrt at Hampton Cowrt that this day Her Majestie had granted to
send me spedily an hundred marks, and that Sir Thomas George had
very honorably dealt for me in the cause. Dec. 2nd, Sir Thomas
George browght me a hundred marks from her Majestie. Dec. 24th to
31st, at Mr. Lurensey of Tooting all these days, and Newyere’s Day
allso, and so cam home by coach (as we went) by Tuesday none, I, my
wyfe, Arthur, Kate, &c. Dec. 31st, at Tooting at Mr. R. Luresey his
howse; abowt thre of the clok after dynner dyd the Bishop of Laigham
serve process uppon me for the nangle, but most unduely.

1593. January, the Lord Threasorer lay dangerously syk in the
begynning of this month. Jan. 2nd, I cam home from Tooting. Jan.
7th, I receyved letters from the Lord Lasky from his capitaynate in
Livonia, and I wrote answer agayn. Jan. 10th, this day death seased
on him. This day at none dyed Edward Maynard just on yere old. Jan.
11th, buried this day at ten of the clok. Jan. 15th, Mr. Ashley, the
clerk of the cownsayle, his wife and whole family removed from my
howse in Mortlak to theyr howse in London in Holborn, with all his
whole family. He and she had used me, my wife and childern,
wurshipfully and bowntifully for our frendeship shewed unto them for
the lone of our howse and lodgings from Allhallow-tyde last. Master
Maynard allso his howsehold removed the 15th and 16th day to London,
and my stable free delivered. Jan. 20th, I sent my letters for the
Lord Lasky to be carryed in a shyp of Dansk called the John of
Dansk. Jan. 21st, Sonday, about none Wenefryde Goose her sone born
and died, and she did [there]uppon for old melancholik pangs destroy
herself. Memorandum, my nurse at Barnes had xvj_s._ more besides the
last 40_s._ in the begynning of this month. Feb. 14th, Francys Dee,
she cam from the nurse at Barnes; the woman very unquiet and
unthankfull. Feb. 15th, Her Majestie gratiously accepted of my few
lynes of thankfulnes delivered unto her by the Cowntess of Warwik
hora secunda a meridie at Hampton Court, two or three dayes before
the remove to Somerset Howse. Feb. 21st, I borrowed £10 of Mr.
Thomas Digges[ll] for one hole yere. Feb. 22nd, a sharp anger
betwene me and the Bishop of Leightyn in the towr, for that he wold
not shew his farder interest to Nangle: he sayd that after I had
seen his brode seal of commendation, that I had institution and
induction to the Nangle. Then I sayd his lordship did fable. He
there uppon that so moved that he called me spitefully “coniver.”
I told him that he did lye in so saying, and that I wold try on the
fleysh of him, or by a bastaned gown of him, if he wer not prisoner
in the Towr. Inter 12ª et 2ª a meridie my sharp anger with the
Bishop of Leightyn in the lieftenante’s dyning parlor before the
Lieutenant Sir Michael Blunt. Mr. Liewtenat Nant and Mr. Blunt are
wittnesses. March 12th and 13th, these two nights I dremed much of
Mr. Kelly, as if he wer in my howse familiar with his wife and
brother. March 17th, Francis Garland cam home and browght me a
letter from Mr. Thomas Kelly. I made acquayntance with Syr Thomas
Chaloner, Knight, who married sergeant Fletewood’s dowghter; Mr.
Thomas Webbes was the meanes. At six after none receyved from Mr.
Francis Nicholls £15, part of one hundred pounds, the rest whereof
£85 is to be receyved from Mr. Nicolls within a fortnight after the
Annunciation of Our Lady next; and after that in the beginning of
June £100, and in Julie the third hundred powndes: and I am to teach
him the conclusion of fixing and teyning the moon, &c.

  [Footnote ll: This notice is particularly interesting, showing
  the intimate connexion which existed between the first English
  mathematician of the day and the philosopher of Mortlake.]

April 3rd, Bartilmew Hikman and Robert Charles cam up. Letice cam
with Barthilmew, and went away agayn. April 8th, Letice cam agayn
from Barnet to my servyse. I receyved £50 of Mr. Nichols. April 9th,
I gave Barthilmew Hikman £12 in new angels to give and pay to Robert
Charles, which he had payd for him at Michelmas last. I gave him
allso a double pistolet for his courtesy. Little Adolph Webbes cam
to me. April 10th, Barthilmew and Robert Charles went homward. May
7th, Thomas Richardson of Bissham cam to Mortlak to me. May 9th, he
and Mr. Laward of the Chandry cam. Our court day at Wymbledon. May
11th, mane hora octava William Emery of Danbery in Essex became my
retayner at Mortlak, commended by Mr. Thanet of Rushmer by Ypswich,
borne 1568, Julii 4. I gave Robert Web 10_s._ Richard 10_s._ and
Elizabeth 3_s._ in the begynning of this month. May 21st, be it
remembered that on this xxj. day of May I bargayned with and bowght
of Mr. Mark Perpoint, of Mortlak, that next mansion howse with the
plat, and all the appertenances abowt it for £32, as the sayd Mr.
Perpoint of late had at the last court-day bowght it, and had
surrender of it unto him made of Thomas Knaresborowgh for £25 to
mydsommer next. Abowt two of the clok after none, before Jane my
wife in the strete, I gave him a saffron noble in ernest for a drink
peny. Mr. Hawkins, of London, at that instant cam to have bowght it.
May 27th, Mr. Francys Blunt, brother to the late Lord Mountjoy,
unkle to the Lord Mowntjoy living, and to Sir Charles of the
court, cam to be acquaynted to me, he having byn a travayle at
Constantinople. June 4th, Barthilmew Hikman cam to Mortlak in the
morning. June 22nd, I had my copy of Mr. Roger Dale our stuard, and
had £5 the fine released of the Lord his bowntifullnes. I told the
stuard that I had bowght the howse of Mr. Mark Perpoynt, and he
desyred to see the note of his copy, and so I did. I told Mr.
Perpoint that I had byn at London to prepare his mony, and I told
him that I had seen the court-roll for his copy. I went to London to
fetch the £32 for Mr. Perpoint, and so I sent him word. This evening
I browght the mony, but he was gon to bed. This morning I tendered
the mony, and told it at goodman Welder’s before Mr. Stokden, and
goodman Welder, but Mr. Perpoint refused to perform the bargayn.
Deus bene vertat!

July 13th, I gave to Robert 5_s._ upon his wagis this day. July
14th, I gave 4_s._ to Letise, part of her noble for her quarter
wagis, ending the 9th day of this month. July 18th, I bowght goodman
Welder his hovel, which is in the yard of the howse next me, which
I bowght of Mr. Mark Perpoint. I gave him a new angel and five new
shillings, and he is to have more 5_s._, that is 20_s._ in all; and
if I cannot compact to enter the howse, then hee is to tak his
hovel, and to restore it to me. July 21st, I give to Richard 5_s._
uppon his wagis this day. July 22nd, I payd Mr. Childe £7. 13_s._
4_d._ for all his wood, xx. lode and vj. July 24th, the offer for
the bargayn agayn of Mr. Perpoynt’s behalf: this is Mr. Stokden’s
doing. July 27th, remember that this Friday I payd Mr. Tomson £4 for
his master Mr. Herbert, which I borrowed 12th of December 1592: and
Mr. Herbert sent it agayn to my furder use by Mistres Lee. Aug. 7th,
Mystres Twyne and Mystres Banister cam to viset me. Mr. Bele and
Mrs. Bele, Mistres Plan, Mrs. Parpoint, &c. dyned with me. I gave
Robert Web 5_s._; he sent it to Mr. Homes. Aug. 9th, I dyned with
the Lord Keper at Kew. Aug. 17th, I and my wife and Katharin our
dowghter dyned with the Lord Keper at Kew. Aug. 28th, I was all day
with the Lord Keper. Mr. Web and the philosopher cam. Aug. 29th, Mr.
Web and the philosopher cam again. Aug. 30th, Mistres Redhed, mother
to Mr. John Ponsoys by her first husbond, Mr. Gubbens, bokebynder,
and his wife, and the same day Mr. Redhed himself, one of her
Majestie’s jentlemen hushers, cam to me. Sept. 11th, Jana, post
triduunam ægrotationem abortiebatur, mane hora decima. Sept. 13th,
the howse surrendered for me by Mr. Mark Perpoint, Mr. William
Walker of Wimbledon, Miles Holland, Mr. John Stockden, the thre
customarie tenants, with promys to bring in his wife at the next
court day to surrender. Sept. 18th, Elizabeth Kyrton had 2_s._ 6_d._
Sept. 20th, Barthilmew Hikman cam to Mortlak, and Robert Charles.
I gave Robert Web 5_s._ by Arthur. Sept. 26th, Mr. Herbert went
toward the court, and so toward Waty. Sept. 28th, tempestuous, windy,
clowdy, hayl and rayn, after three of the clok after none. Remember
that the last day of this month Elizabeth Kyrton, who had served me
twelve yeres, five yeres uppon prentiship and seven for wagis, five
yeres therof for four nobles a yere, and the two last for five
nobles the yere, was payd her full payment now remayning due:
whereuppon she receyved £4. 4_s._ for her due of wagis remayning;
and I gave her moreover an half angel new in gold, and my wife
another; Arthur half-a-crown for him and his brother; Katharyn
half-a-crown for her and her sister. And so she wente from my
servyce uppon no due cause known to me.

Oct. 4th, Sir Edward Keley set at liberty by the Emperor. Oct. 12th,
Mr. Cornelio Camaiere cam from the Lord Lasky from Livonia. Oct.
15th, Margerie Thornton cam to my servyce. Oct. 18th, before Mr.
Perpoint, Miles Holland, Robert Wellder, William Beck surrendred my
cottage agayn unto me, and I payd him £5, the full £12 as it cost
him. To Letice two shillings. Oct. 20th, Mr. Cornelio went toward
the flete of Stade to returne. Oct. 24th, Ostende besieged by
report. Not true. Oct. 25th, Mr. Gray, the Lady Cumberland’s
preacher, his wrangling and denying and despising alchimicall
philosophers. Nov. 5th. Mr. Francys Nicolls, Mr. Prise, Mr. Nores.
Nov. 18th, Jane most desperately angry in respect of her maydes.
Nov. 20th, Margery went and Dorothe Legg cam for 30_s._ yerely.
Margery Thornton was dismissed from my servyce to Mrs. Child, and
Dorothe Leg cam by Mrs Mary Revel’s sending the same day and howr,
hora tertia after none. Nov. 26th, John, sometymes Mr. Colman’s
servant, cam to me from the Lady Cowntess of Cumberland. Dec. 3rd,
the Lord Willowghby his bowntifull promys to me. The Cowntess of
Kent, his syster, and the Cowntess of Cumberland visited me in the
afternone. The Lord Willowghby dyned with me. Dec. 4th, £20 Lord
Willughby. Dec. 5th, the newes of Sir Edward Kelly his libertie.
Dec. 11th, I gave Robert 20_s._ at his going to London with my wife.
Dec. 22nd, I gave Robert two shillings. Dec. 24th, Mr. Webbes
committed to the Marshalsea. Dec. 25th, this night Mr. Webbes got
out, and taken this day (the 26th).

1594. Jan. 3rd, the Lord Keper sent my wife 20 angels in a new red
velvet purse, cira occasum solis paulo ante. Jan. 4th, D. Michael
Peiserus, Doctor Medicus Marchionis Brandeburgensis, me humanissime
invisit. Jan. 5th, a very tempestuous wyndy night. Jan. 9th, Robert
Thickpeny from Sir Richard Martyn, and Miles Holland, baylif for the
Lord of the Manor, sealed up Mr. Webb’s chest, and case of boxes.
Jan. 19th, the cobler with the mad woman. Jan. 25th, I sent my
letters to Mr. Lording for Mr. Pontoys to Dantsiz. Jan. 26th, I cam
to Mr. Web to the Marshalsea. Jan. 27th, Thomas Richardson cam while
I was at London, and so I fownd him at home; and agayn he promised
me his working of forty dayes. Jan. 28th, Mr. Vander Laen promised
on 26 day to begyn his work of fixing _lunam_. Madinia somwhat
sickly. Robert Wood, visitted with spirituall creatures, had comfort
by conference. Jan. 31st, Mr. Vander Laen began his work of _luna_,
five myle sowth from Glocester. Mr. Morgan Treherne told me of Mr.
Lawrence of eighty yeres old. Mr. Thomas Sharp, chief stuard to the
Lady Russell at Bisham, is master and good frende to Thomas
Richardson, as he himselfe told me. Theodore Dee from the myddle of
this month had his left ey blud-shotten from the side next his
temple, very sore bludshotten, above thre wekes contynuing. Feb.
1st, Mr. John Ask sent me two little dubble gilt bowles waying
thirteen ownces and a half. Feb. 7th, Sir Thomas Wilks offer
philosophicall cam to my hands by Mr. Morice Kiffyn. This day the
Archbishop of Canterbury inclined sometyme to the request of
dispensation. Feb. 20th, 21st, Theodor fell sick in the Shrovtyde
weke, and so into a tertian ague. March 10th, uppon a flight of
feare bycause of Mr. Webbes his sending for me to come to him to the
Marshalsea, now when he looked to be condemned on the Monday or
Tuesday next. March 16th, Barthilmew Hikman cam up. March 18th, Mr.
Heriot cam to me. March 20th, I did before Barthilmew Hikman pay
Letice her full yere’s wagis ending the 7th day of Aprill next; her
wagis being four nobles, an apron, a payr of hose and shoes. March
23rd, I gave Barthilmew Hikman the nag which the Lord Keper had
given me. Barthilmew Hikman and William his brother went homward.
Magus disclosed by frendeship of Mr. Richard Alred. Α συδδεν πανγ οφ
ανγερ βετυυενε Μ. Νικολς ανδ με. March 28th, Mr. Francis Garland
browght me Sir Edward Kelley and his brother’s letters. March 31st,
a great fit of the stone in my left kydney: all day I could do but
three or four drops of water, but I drunk a draught of white wyne
and salet oyle, and after that, crabs’ eys in powder with the bone
in the carp’s head, and abowt four of the clok I did eat tosted cake
buttered, and with suger and nutmeg on it, and drunk two great
draughts of ale with it; and I voyded within an howr much water, and
a stone as big as an Alexander seed. God be thanked! Five shillings
to Robert Webb, part of his wagis.

April 1st, Capitayn Hendor made acquayntance with me, and shewed
me a part of his pollicy against the Spanishe King his intended
mischief agaynst her Majestie and this realme. April 4th, John
Stokden cam to study with our children. Mr. Thomas Wye cam with a
token from Mistres Ashley. Remove to Mr. Harding and Mr. Abbot at
Oxford abowt my Arabik boke. April 5th, my right ey very sore and
bludshotten. April 7th, Mr. Nicols cam agayn out of Northampton. Mr.
Barret and Mistres Barret cam to visit me. May 3rd, betwene 6 and 7
after none the Quene sent for me to her in the privy garden at
Grenwich, when I delivered in writing the hevenly admonition, and
Her Majestie tok it thankfully. Onely the Lady Warwyk and Sir Robert
Cecill his Lady wer in the garden with Her Majestie. May 18th, Her
Majestie sent me agayn the copy of the letter of G. K. with thanks
by the Lady Warwick. May 21st, Sir John Wolley moved my sute to Her
Majesty. She graunted after a sort, but referred all to the Lord of
Canterbury. May 25th, Dr. Awbrey moved my sute to Her Majesty, and
answere as before. May 29th, with the Archbishop before the Quene
cam to her house. June 3rd, I, my wife, and seven children, before
the Quene at Thisellworth. My wife kissed her hand. I exhibited my
request for the Archbishop to com to my cottage. June 6th, supped
with the Lord Archbishop. Invited him to my cottage. June 11th,
given to Robert Webb at London seven shillings in the begynning of
this month. June 15th, £40 of Mr. Thomas Harward. I shuld have £60
more. A great fytt of the stone in my kydneys. June 20th, Mistres
Magdalen Perpoynt was sole examined of our Stuard at the Temple.
June 22nd, morgaged my late purchas to Mr. Richard White for £30, to
be received within a few dayes. June 23rd, I discharged Robert Web
of my service, and gave him 40 shillings for a full satisfaction of
all things. Thomas Richardson cam and offered me his work and labor,
and had, as he requested, my letter to Mr. Thomas Sharpe. June 24th,
on Midsommer Day Antony Ryve Taylor cam to my service, for wagis by
the yere three pounds and a livery. Barthilmew Hikman cam. June
26th, I discharged Jane Hikman to go with her father Barthilmew home
into Northamptonshire, and gave her ten shillings, and promised her
at Hallowtyd ten shillings more. Barthilmew Hikman and Goodman Ball
with Jane Hikman went homward. June 29th, after I had hard the
Archbishop his answers and discourses, and that after he had byn the
last Sonday at Tybald’s with the Quene and Lord Threasorer, I take
myself confounded for all suing or hoping for anything that was. And
so adiew to the court and courting tyll God direct me otherwise! The
Archbishop gave me a payre of sufferings to drinke. God be my help
as he is my refuge! Amen.

July 1st, I gave Robert yet more a French crown for a farwell. July
2nd, given to Richard ten shillings uppon his wagis. July 6th,
Michael becam distempered in his hed and bak. July 9th, in the
morning began my hed to ake and be hevy more then of late, and had
some wambling in my stomach. I had broken my fast with sugar sopps,
&c. I gave Letice my servant 5_s._ part of her wagis: with part
whereof she was to buy a smok and neckercher. July 13th, in ortu
solis Michael Dee did give up the ghost after he sayd, “O Lord, have
mercy uppon me!” July 19th, goodman Richardson began his work. Aug.
19th, Elizabeth Felde cam to my servyce: she is to have five nobles
the yere and a smok. Aug. 26th, Mr. Gherardt, the chirurgion and
herbalist, [cam to me]. Aug. 30th, Monsieur Walter Mallet toke his
leave of me to go home to Tholose. He had the fix oyle of saltpetre.
Sept. 18th, I sent letters to Sir Ed. K. and T. Kelly, between 10
and 2 after none taken from the dore.

Oct. 3rd, I payd Mrs. Stockden £4 I borrowed of her; I payd her
26_s._ 8_d._ for four loade of wood. I remayn debter for a load of
hay, and for 400 of billet in forks. Oct. 4th, payd Mr. Childe £3.
10_s._ for ten lode of lose faggot. Oct. 14th, Mr. Robert Thomas
cam to my howse to dwell. Oct. 28th, hora 6½ a meridie, I writ and
sent a letter to the Lady Skydmor, in my wife’s name, to move her
Majestie that eyther I might declare my case to the body of the
cownsayle, or else under the great seale to have lycens to go freely
anywhither. Oct. 31st, lightening without thunder in the afternone
and in the night following.

Nov. 24th, receyved a letter from Sir Edward Kelley by Rowley. Dec.
2nd, Francys Garland cam to England from Prage. Just five yeres past
I cam to England from Breame as Francis Garland cam now: but the
Stade flete stayed at Harwich. The 2nd of our cold December,
Barthilmew was preferred by me to the Lord Willoughby his servyce
at Barbican, in the presence of the Cowntess of Kent: and the
Lord Willoughby did presently write his warrant to Mr. Jonson
in Fletestreet, taylor, to deliver to Barthilmew his cloth and
couishins, and so it was to Barthilmew delivered immediately.
Dec. 7th, Jane my wife delivered her supplication to the Quene’s
Majestie, as she passed out of the privy garden at Somerset Howse to
go to diner to the Savoy to Syr Thomas Henedge. The Lord Admirall
toke it of the Quene. Her Majestie toke the bill agayn and kept [it]
uppon her cushen; and on the 8th day, by the chief motion of the
Lord Admirall, and somwhat of the Lord Buckhurst, the Quene’s wish
was to the Lord Archbishop presently that I shuld have Dr. Day his
place in Powles. Dec. 22nd, payd seven shillings to Elizabeth Felde,
part of her wagis. Given to Lettyce 5_s._, part of her wagis. Payd
to Richard 8_s._, part of his wagis; and all other reckonings payd.

1595. Jan. 8rd, the Wardenship of Manchester spoken of by the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury. Feb. 5th, my bill of Manchester offered to
the Quene afore dynner by Sir John Wolly to signe, but she deferred
it. Feb. 10th, at two after none I toke a cutpurse taking my purse
out of my pocket in the Temple. Feb. 18th, Mr. Laward his sonne
Thomas born at noone or a little after, ¼ vel ½. Consultatio et
deliberatio prima cum Marmione Haselwood in fine istius mensis.
March 18th, Mr. Francis Garland cam this morning to viset me,
and had much talk with me of Sir E. K. March 20th, Mr. Marmion
Haselwood, Mr. Dymmock, and Mr. Hipwell, cam to me to Mortlak. March
21st, Barthilmew Hikman cam to Mortlak. March 26th, Barthilmew
homeward. March 29th, Mr. Laward and Mr. Alred cam to me.

April 18th, my bill for Manchester Wardenship signed by the Quene,
Mr. Herbert offring it her. May 4th, payd Richard 20_s._ part of
his wagis, and more I gave him 10_s._ for full payment of all od
reckenings of late. May 5th, Mr. Cave dyed. May 8th, the Master of
the Rolls his curtesy, thowgh I had never spoken unto him. May 9th,
my coosen John Awbry cam to me, to recreate himselfe for a while.
May 21st, I discharged Letice of my servyce, and payd all duetyes
untyll this day, her yere ending on the 8th of Aprill. I gave her
for a month over 2_s._ 6_d._ and for to spend by the way I gave her
2_s._ 6_d._, Robert Charles and my wife being by in my study. May
25th, 26th, 27th, the Signet, the Privy Seale, and the Great Seale
of the Wardenship; £3. 12_s._ borrowed of my brother Arnold. June
1st, my yong coosen, John Awbrey, was sent for to his father to
London. Mr. Partrich, his brother, in London; Richard Ward, and
other cam for him. June 9th, Barthilmew Hikman went homeward. June
11th, I wrote to the Erle of Derby, his secretary, abowt Manchester.
June 18th, Anne Powell cam to my service; she is to have four nobles
by the yere, a payr of hose and shoes. June 21st, the Erle of Derby
his letter to Mr. Warren for the colledge. June 25th, Dr. Awbrey
died at midnight. My cosen, Mr. George Broke, gave me £50 in
gold, hora tertia a meridie. June 29th, Mr. John Blayney, of Over
Kingesham in Radnorshyre, and Mr. Richard Baldwyn, of Duddlebury in
Shropshyre, visited me at Mortlak. The great-grandfather of the sayd
John, and my great-grandmother by the father side, were brother and
sister.

July 1st, the two brethren, Master Willemots, of Oxfordshire, cam to
talk of my howse hyring. Master Baynton cam with Mistres Katharyn
Hazelwood, wife to Mr. Fuller. July 7th, Mr. Morgan Jones, my cosen,
cam to me at Mistres Walls twise. July 12th, Mr. Goodier, of
Manchester, cam to me. Dies natalis. July 15th, I gave Mr. Morgan
Traharn his bill to Mr. Harbert. July 25th, Mrs. Mary Nevell cam.
July 28th, a letter from Mr. Oliver Carter, Fellow of Manchester
College. I writt agayn to him the same day. July 29th, Mistres Mary
Nevel went to London, and so into Kent. July 31st, the Cowntess of
Warwik did this evening thank her Majestie in my name, and for
me, for her gift of the Wardenship of Manchester. She toke it
gratiously; and was sorry that it was so far from hens, but that
some better thing neer hand shall be fownd for me; and, if
opportunitie of tyme wold serve, her Majestie wold speak with me
herself. I had a bill made by Mr. Wood, one of the clerks of the
signet, for the first frutes given me by her Majestie. Aug. 2nd, at
Mr. Cosener his table at Grenewich: I spak that wich greatly liked
Mr. Sergeant Oliver Lloyd; wold have disputed agayn. Aug. 5th,
very rayny all day, and had the wynde north E. and W. Aug. 12th,
I receyved Sir Edward Kellyes letters of the Emperor’s, inviting me
to his servyce again. Aug. 14th, peperit Jana (nutu Dei) circa horam
quartam a meridie. Aug. 27th, Margarite Dee baptized hora 4½ a
meridie. Godfather, the Lord Keper; his deputy, Mr. Crowne.
Godmothers, the Cowntess of Cumberland, her deputy Mistres Davis;
and the Cowntess of Essex, her deputy Mistres Bele. Barthilmew
Hikman cam to Mortlak on his own busines. Sept. 2nd, the spider at
ten of the clok at night suddenly on my desk, and suddenly gon;
a most rare one in bygnes and length of feet. I was in a great study
at my desk. Sept. 6th I gave Richard 2_s._ 6_d._ part of his wagis,
when he went to his grandfather. Sept. 13th, I dyned with the Erle
of Derby at Russell Howse, Mr. Thymothew and Mr. John Statfeldt,
German, being there. Sept. 14th, to Elizabeth Feeld _2s._ for the
taylor. Sept. 22nd, Elizabeth Feeld went from my servyce. I dined
with the Erle of Darby. Sept. 26th, £6 borrowed of my cosen William
Hetherley for fourteen days to pay for Barthilmew Hikman. Sept.
29th, Margery Stubble of Hownslow, our dry nurse, entred into the
yere of her servyce begynning on Michaelmas Day, and is to have £3
her yeres wagis and a gown cloth of russet. Edward Edwards began his
yere of serving me allso on Michelmas Day, and he must have 40_s._
for his yere’s wagis, and a lyvery.

Oct. 7th, my anger (hor. 5 a mer.) with Edward my coke, bycause of
his disorder. Oct. 8th, Mr. Richard Western lent me £10 for a yere.
Oct. 9th, I dyned with Syr Walter Rawlegh at Durham Howse. Oct.
11th, to Edward 2_s._, part of wagis. Mr. Banks lent me uppon lone
tyll after Christmas £5. Mr. Emery sent me £3 by my servant Richard
Walkedine. Oct. 14th, to Anne 2_s._ part of wagis; to Elizabeth
Felde payd the rest of her yeres wagis, and moreover 2_s._ 6_d._
given for the overplus tyme. Oct. 19th, the old reckoning betwene me
and Edmond Hilton made clere. Of his eleven pownds demanded, I shewd
him of my old note that he had receyved £6. 15_s._, and after that
Sted his 25_s._, and Mr. Emery his £3 lent him; as I did shew him
Sted his letter, and Mr. Emery his letter of the last month. All
these sommes make just an eleven pownd. Payd to nurse Stubble,
in part of payment of her wagis, 5_s._ Oct. 20th, to Anne 12_d._
Richard rode toward Oxford for my Arabik boke. Oct. 25th, Sted was a
suter to me for help in law against his father. Nov. 8th, my goods
sent me by Peravall toward Manchester. Nov. 19th, my Arabik boke
restored by God’s favor. Nov. 21st, goodwife Lidgatt payd her rent
two quarters ending at the feast of the Annunciation of our Lady
next, 13_s._ 4_d._ Goodman Agar was by in my hall at Mortlak. Nov.
25th, the newes that Sir Edward Kelley was slayne. Nov. 26th, Mr.
Nicolas Bagwell of Manchester browght me a letter from my brother
Arnold. Lent to Mister Laurence Dutton twelve shillings. My wife and
children all by water toward Coventry. Dec. 10th, Mr. Lok his Arabik
bokes and letter to me by Mr. Berran his sonne. Dec. 23rd, I payd to
John Norton, stationer, ten pownds in hand, and was bownd in a
recognisance before Doctor Hone for the payment of the rest, £10
yerely, at Christmas and Midsommer £5, tyll £53 more 14_s._ 8_d._
were payd. Receyved £30 in part of payment of one hundred for my
howse at Manchester of Mr. Paget. Dec. 26th, nata filia Comitis
Derby mane circa quartam horam Londini.

1596. Feb. 15th, I cam to Manchester a meridie hora quinta. Feb.
20th, enstalled in Manchester wardenship inter nonam et undecimam
horam ante meridiem. March 14th, warning given publikely against
Thomas Goodyer. March 21st, warning given publikly of licence given
to Thomas Goodyer.

April 2nd, Sir John Byron, knight, and Mr. John Byron, esquier,
dyned with me in the colledg. I moved the matter of Xyd an aker of
hay grownd of his tenants. He promised well. April 6th, I went to
Mr. Ashton of Lester and to Mr. Sherington. April 8th, Margaret Dee
begonne to be weaned. May 7th, possession taking in Salford. May
11th, my brother Aubrey and Richard toward London. June 3rd, I gave
Antony Cowly 20_s._ and discharged him. June 4th, Antony Cowley went
yerely from my howse, I know not whither. June 14th, Mr. Harry
Savill, the antiquary, cam to me. June 15th, I wrote by Mr. Harry
Savill of the book dwelling at Hallyfax to Christopher Saxton at
Denningley. I sent my letter to Sir Robert Cecill’s howse by William
Debdell. June 18th, the commission for the colledge sent to London
to be engrossed in the Duchy office. I sent by Nicholas Baguely of
Newton to Mr. Brogreton and to William Nicolson to follow it this
terme. June 21st, Mr. Christopher Saxton cam to me. June 22nd,
entred upon great Brereridings in Salford. June 24th, Barthilmew
cam. June 25th, order taken by the sherif betwene me and Raf Holden.
June 26th, the Erle of Derby with the Lady Gerard, Sir .... Molyneux
and his Lady, dawghter to the Lady Gerard, Master Hawghton and
others, cam suddenly uppon [me] after three of the clok. I made them
a skoler’s collation, and it was taken in good part. I browght his
honor and the ladyes to Ardwyk Grene toward Lyme, at Mr. Legh his
howse, twelve myles of. June 29th, wyndy and rayny. July 5th, Mr.
Savill and Mr. Saxton cam. July 6th, I, Mr. Saxton and Arthur
Rouland, John and Richard, to Howgh Hall. July 9th, I sent Roger Kay
of Manchester with my letters into Wales. July 10th, Manchester town
described and measured by Mr. Christopher Saxton. Given to nurse
Stubley 10_s._, part of wagis. July 10th to 14th, occupyed with low
controversies, as with Holden of Salford and the tenants of Sir John
Byron of Faylsworth in the right of the colledge, sending to .....
to the cownty, and sending for Mr. Tyldesley or Chester for
cownsaylers. July 12th, given more to nurse, when her sonne John
Stubley went from me toward London to be reconcyled to his master.
I gave him 5_s._ The yong man, Leon the hatter, went with him. July
14th, Mr. Saxton rode away. The sessions day at Manchester. July
19th, Ales cam by Mrs. Beston’s help to my servyce. Thomas, my coke,
went from me. July 21st, Isabell Bardman from the chamber to the
kitchin. July 25th, thunder in the morning; rayne in the night. July
27th, the Erle of Darby went by London ward; dyned at Curtes’ howse.
Aug. 10th, Mr. Thomas Jones of Tregarron cam to me to Manchester and
rode toward Wales bak agayn the 13th day to mete the catall coming.
Aug. 13th, I rid toward York. Halifax and Mr. Thomas Jones rode
toward Wales. Aug. 20th, I cam to Manchester from York. Aug. 20th
to 27th, much disquietnes and controversy abowt the tythe corne of
Hulme. Aug. 30th, Cromsall corne-tyth obteyned by consent, but
afterwards dowted and half denyed; then utterly denyed. Sept. 1st,
Mary Goodwyn cam to my servyce to govern and teach Madinia and
Margaret, my yong dowghters. Sept. 3rd, being Fryday, I rode to Syr
John Byron’s, to Royton, to talk with him abowt the controversy
betwene the colledg and his tenants. He pretented that we have part
of Faylesworth Common within our Newton Heath, which cannot be
proved I am sure. We wer agreed that James Traves (being his bayly)
and Francis Nutthall, his servant for him, shold with me understand
all circumstances, and so duely to procede. Sept. 5th, seventeen hed
of cattell from my kinsfolk in Wales by the curteous Griffith David,
nephew to Mr. Thomas Griffith, browght.

Oct. 26th, Mr. Francis Nicols and Barthilmew cam to Manchester. Oct.
29th, they rode homeward. Nov. 22nd, £4. 6_s._ given to my wife by
Mr. Francys Wodcote. Dec. 3rd, Mr. Palmer cam to be curate.

1597. Jan. 19th, I sent £4 to Barthilmew Hikman by Bradshaw the
carryer. Jan. 22nd, Olyver Carter’s thret to sue me with proces from
London was this Satterday in the church declared to the clerk. Feb.
5th, Rich. Key of Weram cwrate cam to me by Mr. Heton’s information,
and I to try him three monthes for 50_s._ wagis. Feb. 7th, John
Morryce came to Manchester. Feb. 11th, £5 borowed of Mr. Mat. Heton.
Feb. 14th, this Monday John Morrise went with my letters to Mr. John
Gwyn, and twelve more in Montgomeryshyre, esquyers. Feb. 17th,
delivered to Charles Legh the elder my silver tankard with the
cover, all dubble gilt, of the Cowntess of Herford’s gift to Francis
her goddoughter, waying 22 oz. great waight, to lay in pawn in his
owne name to Robert Welsham the goldsmith for £4 tyll within two
dayes after May-day next. My dowghter Katharin and John Crocker and
I myself (John Dee) were at the delivery of it and waying of it in
my chamber: it was wrapped in a new handkercher cloth. Feb. 25th,
Mr. Heton borrowed the Concordantiæ Majores Roberti Stephani. He
hath allso my boke _De Cœna_ of Doctor Pezelia. March 7th, Mr. Heton
lent me £5 more, and thereuppon I gave him a bill of my hand for the
whole ten pownd, to be payd at Michelmas next. The other £5 was
receyved the 11th of February last. March 17th, Barthilmew Hikman
cam. March 19th, I lent Mr. Hopwood _Wierus de præstigiis Dæmonum_.

April 10th, a supplication exhibited by the parishioners. April
11th, 12th, trubblesom days abowt Mr. Palmer the curate. April 15th,
I had my _Wierus de præstigiis Dæmonum_ from Mr. Hopwood, and lent
him _Flagellum Dæmonum_ and _Fustio Dæmonum_ in 8vo, for tyme till
Midsomer. April 21st, I sent Barthilmew Hikman 40_s._ I sent by
Bradshaw many letters to London. I sent by goodman Thurp of Salford
my great letter to the byshop of Lincolne, and one to Mr.
Shallcross. April 22nd, after none Sir Urien Legh knight, and his
brother, and Mr. Brown, and Mr. George Booth, sherif of Chesshire,
did viset me. Mr. Booth sayd that he wold yeld that to me that he
wold not yeld to the bisshop nor any other. Mr. Wortley of Wortley
cam allso the same day hora quarta a meridie. May 2nd, Mr. Hulme and
Mr. Williamson cam to me in the Lord Bishop of Lincoln’s case for
Hulme. May 4th, I, with Sir Robert Barber, curat, and Robert
Talsley, clerk of Manchester parish church, with diverse of the town
of divers ages, went in perambulation to the bownds of Manchester
parish: began at the Leeless Bench against Prestwich parish, and so
had a vew of the thre corne staks, and then down tyll Mr. Standysh
new enclosure on the Low, wher we stayed and vewed the stak yet
standing in the bank of the dich, being from the corne a eleven
measures of Mr. Standley’s stak then in his hand, and two fote more,
which still I did measure afterward, and it did conteyn in Kentish
feete 6 ynches and thre quarters. The survey geometricall of the
very circuits of Manchester parish was ended in this, being the
sixth day of my work. May 11th, the way to Stopford surveyed by John
Cholmeley and John Crocker. May 17th, to Richard Walkeden 20_s._ of
his wagis payd. May 20th, the Lady Booth made acquayntance here. May
23rd, to Isabell Boordman 8_s._ 8_d._ to make up whole yere’s wagis
due at the Annunciation of our Lady last past. I allowed to Mr.
Williamson ten dayes respite more for his kinsman to bring in his
evidence for the process of the proceedings. Payd to nurse 3_s._ to
make up her full payment of her yere’s wagis ended at Michaelmas
last. May 27th, open enmitie with Palmer before Sir Edward Fitton.
Sir Edward Fitton told Matthew Palmer to his face that he had known
him to be a mutinous man and a ...... June 9th, Thomas Sankinson
told me of John Basset his coming to London. June 14th, the
unlawfull assembly and rowte of William Cutcheth, Captayn Bradley,
John Taylor, Rafe Taylor, at Newton, against my men, describing the
rumour of Newton. June 27th, newes from Hull of 23 barrells of Dansk
rye sent me from John Pontoys.

July 1st, I sent Roger Kay to Vanydles for catall. July 4th,
the carriers to Wakefeld for the corn. July 5th, toward evening
lightning and little thunder. July 6th, thunder in the morning. July
7th, five horse lode of Dansk ry cam home. July 19th, the strang
pang of my back opening mane hora 6¼. In the church uppon Mr.
Palmer’s disorder against Mr. Lawrence. July 20th, the last of my
Dansk rye, in all 21 horse load. Aug. 6th, this night I had the
vision and shew of many bokes in my dreame, and among the rest was
one great volume thik in large quarto, new printed, on the first
page whereof as a title in great letters was printed “Notus in Judæa
Deus.” Many other bokes methowght I saw new printed, of very strange
arguments. I lent Mr. Edward Hopwood of Hopwood my _Malleus
Maleficarum_ to use tyll new yere’s tyde next, a short thik old boke
with two clasps, printed anno 1517. Aug. 19th, the Erle and Cowntess
of Derby cam to Alport lodg. Aug. 21st, the Erle and Cowntess of
Derby had a banket at my lodging at the colledge hora 4½. Aug. 27th,
John Addenstall from Mr. Emery. I wrote. Sept. 3rd, Mr. Werall of
Lobester within two miles of Donkaster cam to me to be acquaynted
with me. Sept. 9th, very wyndy at Sowth and rayny. Sept. 12th, hayle
this morning on Monday. Sept. 15th, lent by Mr. Werall 40_s._ John
Cholmley went with him to give him and other physik; and I answered
John Cholmeley the 40_s._ again. Sept 24th, Barthilmew cam. Sept.
25th, Mr. Olyver Carter his impudent and evident disolutenes in the
church. Sept. 26th, he repented and some pacification was made.
Sept. 27th, I granted a lease of thre lives to Mr. Ratclyf for two
howses in Dene Square of 7_s._ rent both; fine, twenty nobles. Sept.
28th, cam Mr. Yardely of Calcot in Chesshyre, abowt six myles wide
of Chester, toward the Holt. Nova de philosopho D. Waldero. Sept.
30th, John Crockar (my good servant) had leave to go to see his
parents. He went with Barthilmew Hikman and Robert Charles toward
Branbroke, with Arthur Golding, to cure of his fistula. John Crocker
intendeth to returne abowt Easter or at Whitsuntyde next. God be his
spede! Mr. Humphry Damport made our stuard.

Oct. 12th, Rafe Holden preferred a bill against Richard Walkeson for
Brereriding’s chase entyring, which I and Antony Ryve ..... fals.
The bill was not fownd. Oct. 22nd, John Fletcher of Manchester went
with my letters to Vanylos this Sunday morning. Nov. 3rd, Mr. John
Cholmeley toward London by Market-Harborow. Nov. 7th, the fellows
and the receyver agreed not with me in accounts. Paulo post nonam
mane Arthur’s left eye hurt at playing at fence with rapier and
dagger of sticks, by a foyne of Edmond Arnold. Nov. 10th, Mr. Burch
his letter from Mathew Palmer. Nov. 14th, the fellows wold not
graunt me the £5. for my howse-rent, as the Archbishops had
graunted: and our foundation commaundeth an howse. Nov. 17th, I sent
Ed. Arnold to London on fote with my letters to D. Julio. Dec. 3rd,
to Richard Walkeden 10_s._ in part of wagis. To nurse 10_s._ Dec.
9th, I visited the grammar schole. Dec. 13th, I wrote by the carryer
Barret to D. Cæsar. Dec. 14th, Mr. George Broke, sonne to Mr.....
Broke of ...., cam to be acquaynted with me, whome I used most
frendely. Mr. Ratclif of Manchester cam with him, but Mr. Heton
allso cam on Tuesday after none when I had no leyser. Dec. 17, I
lent to Mr. Barlow for his sonne a Spanish grammer in 8vo. printed
at Lovayn in anno 1555 by Bartholomæus Gravay in Spanish, French,
and Latin. To R. Dickonson I payd £7. 2_s._ for the plate and a new
bell made till 1599, January 1st, £66.

1598. Jan. 4th, I wrote to Barthilmew and Charles by Bradshaw. Jan.
17th, my brother Arnold to Chester and Vaunlos. Jan. 18th, Ed.
Arnold with my letter to London. Jan. 19th, hora secunda a meridie I
cam before the justices against James Shallcross and John Lawrence
for misusing my name to deceyve Mr. Harrughby. Jan. 20th, Walter
Fletcher, chirurgien, from Barthilmew Hikman cam. Jan. 22nd, after
midnight the college gate toward Hunt’s Hall did fall, and som parte
of the wall going down the lane. I receyved letters from Mr. John
Pontoys. Jan. 24th, Walter Fletcher went with my letters to
Barthilmew Hikman and Robert Charles. Amaritudo mea circa mediam
noctem. Jan. 28th, the cloose was hyerd of Ed. Brydock for thre
pownd payd beforehand by me John Dee to the said Ed. Brydock, being
£4 from Candlemas next tyll Candlemas come a twelvemonth. Feb. 9th,
George Birch sute was stayd at Chester uppon his promise to compownd
with me for all tyth, haye, and other matter. Thomas Goodyer his
sute and excommunication I stayed, salvo interim jure suo. Baxter’s
likewise I stayd at Chester court. Feb. 12th, newes from Mr. Smyth,
of Upton personage, cam this Sunday. Feb. 13th, Edmond Arnold to
London; thereuppon I sent spedily. Feb. 20th, I wrote by Oliver
Ellet, the taylor, to Mr. Nicolls to Faxton. Feb. 22nd, Mr. Nicolls
cam and wished to mete Ellet. Feb. 25th, the eclips. A clowdy day,
but great darknes abowt 9½ mane. Feb. 26th, circa mediam noctem
amaritudo mea. Feb. 27th, Mr. Nicolls rode homeward, and met the
messager a little beyond Stopford. I lent Mr. Nicolls home with him
Roger Edward’s boke to be browght to me by Barthilmew Hikman. March
1st, I receyved Mr. Thynne his letter for Sted’s det, and Ed. Arnold
his letter of the sute from Upton, and of the Lord Archebisshop his
hard dealing. March 2nd, I sent the statute staple to London to Mr.
George Brok for Sted. I wrote letters by John Hardy, and sent them
in a box. March 5th, newes of Mistres Mary Nevell’s death by William
Nicholson, that she dyed the Fryday after Candelmas Day. March 11th,
borrowed 40_s._ of Mr. George Kenion, of Kersall, to repay againe as
sone as I can conveniently. Receyved by Richard Walkeden.

1600. June 10th, set out from London. Jun. 18th, I, my wife, Arthur
Rowland, Mistres Marie Nicols, and Mr. Richard Arnold cam to
Manchester.

July 3rd, the Commission set uppon in the Chapter Howse. July 7th,
this morning, as I lay in my bed, it cam into my fantasy to write a
boke, “De differentiis quibusdam corporum et spirituum.” July 8th,
I writ to the Lord Bishop of Chester by Mr. Withenstalls. July 10th,
Mr. Nicols and Barthilmew Hickman cam. July 14th, Francys Nicols and
Barthilmew Hikman went homeward. July 17th, I willed the fellows to
com to me by nine the next day. July 18th, it is to be noted of the
great pacifications unexpected of man which happened this Friday;
for in the forenone (betwene nine and ten) where the fellows were
greatly in doubt of my heavy displeasure, by reason of their
manifold misusing of themselves against me, I did with all lenity
interteyn them, and shewed the most part of the things that I had
browght to pass at London for the college good, and told Mr. Carter
(going away) that I must speak with him alone. Robert Leigh and
Charles Legh were by. Secondly, the great sute betwene Redishmer and
me was stayed and by Mr. Richard Holland his wisdom. Thirdly, the
organs uppon condition was admitted. And fourthly, Mr. Williamson’s
resignation granted for a preacher to be gotten from Cambridge. July
19th, I lent Randall Kemp my second part of Hollinshed’s Great
Chronicle for ij. or iij. wekes. To Newton he restored it. July
31st, we held our audit, I and the fellows for the two yeres last
past in my absence, Olyver Carter, Thomas Williamson, and Robert
Birch, Charles Legh the elder being receyver. I red and gave unto
Mistres Mary Nicolls her prayer.

Aug. 5th, I visited the grammar schole, and fownd great imperfection
in all and every of the scholers to my great grief. Aug. 6th, I had
a dream after midnight of my working of the philosopher’s stone with
other. My dreame was after midnight toward day. Aug. 10th,
Eucharistam suscepimus, ego, uxor, filia Katharina, et Maria
Nicolls. Aug. 30th, a great tempest of mighty wynde S.W. from 2 tyll
6, with rayne.

Sept. 11th, Mr. Holland of Denby, Mr. Gerard of Stopford, Mr.
Langley, commissioners from the bishop of Chester, authorized by the
bishop of Chester, did call me before them in the church abowt thre
of the clok after none, and did deliver to me certayn petitions put
up by the fellows against me to answer before the 18th of this
month. I answered them all eodem tempore, and yet they gave me leave
to write at leiser. Sept. 16th, Mr. Harmer and Mr. Davis, gentlemen
of Flyntshire, within four or five myle of Hurden Castell, did viset
me. Sept. 29th, I burned before Mr. Nicols, his brother, and Mr.
Wortley, all Bartholomew Hikman his untrue actions.[mm] Sept. 30th,
after the departing of Mr. Francis Nicolls, his dowghter Mistres
Mary, his brother Mr. William, Mr. Wortley, at my returne from
Deansgate, to the ende whereof I browght them on fote, Mr. Roger
Kooke offred and promised his faithfull and diligent care and help,
to the best of his skill and powre, in the processes chymicall, and
that he will rather do so then to be with any in England; which his
promise the Lord blesse and confirm! He told me that Mr. Anthony
considered him very liberally and frendely, but he told him that he
had promised me. Then he liked in him the fidelity of regarding such
his promise.

  [Footnote mm: In a note by Dee in MS. Ashm. 488, he says, “All
  Barthilmew’s reports of sight and hering spirituall wer burnt;
  a copy of the first part, which was afterward fownd, was burnt
  before me and my wife.”]

Oct. 13th, be it remembered that Sir Georg Both cam to Manchester to
viset Mr. Humfrey Damport, cownsaylor of Gray’s Inne, and so cam to
the colledg to me; and after a few words of discowrse, we agreed as
concerning two or three tenements in Durham Massy in his occupying.
That he and I with the fellows wold stand to the arbitrement of the
sayd Mr. Damport, after his next return hither from London. John
Radclyf, Mr. Damport’s man, was with him here, and Mr. Dumbell, but
they hard not our agrement; we were in my dyning-room. Oct. 22nd,
receyved a kinde letter from the Lord Bishop of Chester in the
behalfe of Thomas Billings for a curatship. Nov. 1st, Mr. Roger Coke
did begyn to destill. Nov. 4th, the commission and jury did finde
the titles of Nuthurst due to Manchester against Mr. James Ashton of
Chaterdon. Nov. 7th, Oliver Carter his...... before Mr. Birch,
Richard Legh and Charles Legh, in the colledg howse. Dec. 2nd,
colledg awdit. Allowed my due of £7 yerely for my howse-rent tyll
Michelmas last. Arthur Dee a graunt of the chapter clerkship from
Owen Hodges, to be had yf £6 wer payd to him for his patent. Dec.
20th, borowed of Mr. Edmund Chetam the scholemaster £10 for one yere
uppon plate, two bowles, two cupps with handles, all silver, waying
all 32 oz. Item, two potts with cover and handells, double gilt
within and without, waying 16 oz.

1601. Jan. 19th, borrowed of Adam Holland of Newton £5 till Hilary
day, uppon a silver salt dubble gilt with a cover, waying 14 oz.
Feb. 2nd, Roger Cook his supposed plat laying to my discredit was by
Arthur my sone fownd by chaunce in a box of his papers in his own
handwriting circa meridiem, and after none abowt 1½ browght to my
knowledg face to face. O Deus, libera nos a malo! All was mistaken,
and we reconcyled godly. Feb. 10th to 15th, reconciliation betwene
us, and I did declare to my wife, Katharine my dowghter, Arthur and
Rowland, how things wer thus taken. Feb. 18th, Jane cam to my
servyce from Cletheraw. Feb. 25th, R. K[oke] pactum sacrum hora
octava mane. March 2nd, Mr. Roger Coke went toward London. March
19th, I receyved the long letters from Bartholomew Hickman hora
secunda a meridie by a carryer of Oldham. April 6th, Mr. Holcroft of
Vale Royall his first acquaintance at Manchester by reason of
William Herbert his frend. He used me and reported of me very freely
and wurshiply.




CATALOGUS

Librorum Bibliothecæ Externæ

Mortlacensis

D. JOH. DEE, A{o} 1583, 6 SEPT.


LIBRI MANUSCRIPTI.

  [_From MS. Trin. Coll. Cantab. O. iv._ 20, _transcribed by Ashmole in
  MS. Ashm._ 1142. _Another autograph copy is preserved in MS. Harl._
  1879, _which scarcely differs from that in the library of Trinity
  College. The numbers prefixed to the several volumes are added, for
  the sake of reference, by the Editor._]

1. Milei sphæricorum tractatus tres.
        4º pergameno.

2. Theoricæ planetarum.-- Jordani de triangulis, ubi de quadratura
  circuli.-- Ejusdem de perspectiva.-- Ejusdem de speculis, crepusculis,
  ponderibus, speculis comburentibus, lib. ii.
        4º scripti pergameno.

3. Compendium de vitis philosophorum anonymi.-- Ursonis de
  commixtionibus elementorum.-- Ejusdem aphorismi.
        4º pergameno.

4. Avicenna de anima mundi, cum aliis, videlicet, Liber cujus initium
  est, “Inspector præcedentis libri Avicennæ.”-- Expositorius Rogeri
  Bachonis.-- Liber de ponderibus.-- Morienus ad regem Calid.-- Rasis
  libri quinque de deceno (?)-- Hermetis libri septem.-- Rosinus ad
  Euthesiam.-- Dicta sapientis.-- Turba philosophorum.-- Distinctionum
  sapientium liber.-- Epistola Alexandri regis Persarum.-- Aristoteles
  de 30 verbis.-- Socratis liber.-- Effrey Effinensis liber.-- Liber
  Calid.-- Liber commentatus.-- Opus philosophorum.-- Geber de perfecto
  magisterio.
        4º pergameno.

5. Joh. Duns Scoti quæstiones in Porphyrii quinque voces.-- Antonii
  cujusdam expositio in categorias sex, &c.-- Rogerii Bachonis de
  multiplicatione specierum.-- Ejusdem perspectiva.
        4º pergameno.

6. Thomæ Aquinatis quæstionum disputatarum volumen.
        4º pergameno.

7. Scintillarium poetarum.-- Summa chiromantiæ.-- Ovidii metamorphoseos
  expositio.-- Tractatus de veneno.-- Valerius ad Ruffinum de non
  ducenda uxore, cum expositione.-- Joh. Wyclyf determinatio.-- Literæ
  fratris Wilhelmi Fleth.-- Fulgentii mythologiæ cum Expositione.--
  Tractatus de difficilibus dictionibus Bibliæ.-- Rob. Lincolniensis in
  oculo morali.-- Rob. Lincolniensis de ratione veneni.-- Joh. Walensis
  breviloquium philosophorum, descriptum per Stoctonem Cantabrigiæ,
  1375.-- Casus abstracti in jure, per Fratrem Hermannum de provincia
  Saxoniæ.-- Casus episcopo reservati.-- Expositio salutationis
  angelicæ.[1]
        4º pergameno.

    [Footnote 1: Now in Trinity College, Dublin. Bern. 148, (H. 12.)]

8. De ponderibus et mensuris medicinalis operationis.-- Viaticus
  Constantini Africani libri 7.-- De modo medendi experimenta.-- De
  origine morborum, et eorum cognitione per urinam.-- De electuariis,
  &c.
        4º pergameno.

9. Ethici Histri cosmographia, ex versione Latina D. Hieronymi.[2]
        4º pergameno.

    One I had with me, and one I left here, which is noted after.

    [Footnote 2: Now MS. Cotton. Vespas. B. x. thus inscribed by Dr.
    Dee’s hand, “Johannes Dee, 1565, Februarii 21, Wigorniæ, ex dono
    decani ecclesiæ, Magistri Beddar.”]

10. Anticlaudianus, carmine.-- Hugonis de Pushac, Dunelmensis Episcopi,
  Brutus, carmine.[3]
        Longiuscula forma, pergameno.

    [Footnote 3: This MS. is now in the Cottonian library, Vespas. A. x.
    “Joannes Dee, 1574, Maij 7, bowght uppon a stall in London.”]

11. Tractatus compendiosus de animalibus.
        4º pergameno.

12. Wilhelmi Parisiensis fragment. de universis.
        4º pergameno.

13. Euclidis Elementa Geometrica, Optica et Catoptrica, ex Arabico
  translata per Adellardum.-- Theodosii Sphæricorum libri.-- Liber de
  occultis.-- Ptolomæi planisphærium.-- Jordani planisphærium.--
  Archimedis tractatus de quadratura circuli.-- Gerardi de Brussel liber
  de motu.-- Jordanus de ponderibus.-- Libri quatuor geometriæ
  practicæ.-- Alfarabius de scientiis.-- Wilhelmi de Conchis
  philosophia.-- Rasis liber de phisiognomia.-- Anatomia hominis.-- De
  proprietatibus elementorum.-- cum aliis.
        4º pergameno.

14. Augustinus de anima et spiritu.-- Theoremata de spiritu et anima
  demonstrata.-- Algorithmus demonstratus Joh. de Sacrobosco.-- Joh. de
  Rupella summa de anima.-- Rob. Lincolniensis tractatus de sphæra.--
  Joh. de Sacrobosco tractatus de sphæra.-- Tractatus de proportione et
  proportionalitate, &c. Rogeri Bachonis-- cum aliis.
        pergameno, 4º.

15. Maximi Monachi, Dionisii Areopagitæ, Sophronii Solitarii, et aliorum
  Græcorum fragmenta nonnulla.
        pergameno, 4º.

16. Ramundi Lullii liber de quinta essentia.
        papyro, fº.

    Non est Ramundi Lullii, sed collectanea diversa ex Paracelso.

17. Rogerii Bachonis de anima, et ejus operibus.-- Ejusdem liber de
  intellectu et intelligibili.
        fº pergameno.

18. Apologia de versutiis atque perversitatibus pseudo-theologorum et
  religiosorum.-- Joachim Abbatis prophetia contra religiones tenentes
  ordinem mendicantium.-- Arnoldi de Villa Nova opus de generibus
  abusionum veritatis, et de pseudo-ministris Antichristi cognoscendis,
  et de pastorali officio circa gregem exercendo.-- Ejusdem prophetia
  catholica, tradens artem annihilandi versutias Antichristi et omnium
  membrorum ejus, ad sacrum collegium Romanorum.
        pergameno, fº.

19. Rogeri Bachonis de retardatione senectutis et senii, &c.-- Ejusdem
  de graduatione medicinarum compositarum, &c.
        pergameno, fº.

20. Ejusdem Bachonis metaphisica.-- Ejusdem œconomica.
        pergameno, 4º.

21. Ejusdem[4] de animalibus fragmentum.
        pergameno, fº.

    [Footnote 4: Dee has added in the margin the word “dubito,”
    meaning, I suppose, that there was not any sufficient evidence
    for attributing this treatise to Roger Bacon.]

22. Ejusdem Bachonis fragmenta quædam; videlicet, de multiplicatione et
  corruptione specierum.-- Item communia naturalia.-- Epistola ad
  Clementem per R. de utilitate scientiarum artis experimentalis, &c.
        pergameno, fº.

23. Rogeri Bachonis pars sexta Operis Majoris, quæ est Scientia
  Experimentalis, ad Clementem Pontif: Romanorum.-- Ejusdem Operis
  Majoris pars septima, quæ est, Philosophia Moralis.-- Ejusdem Alchimiæ
  tractatus expositorius, ad Clementem P.M.R.-- Ejusdem compendium
  alchimiæ.-- Avicennæ clavis sapientiæ, seu porta minor, seu tractatus
  de anima.-- Breviloquium Holcot.-- Rogerii Bachonis speculum
  alchimiæ.-- Quæstiones super librum Jordani de ponderibus.--
  Compendium artis, Raymundi Lullii.-- Excerpta ex theorica Ramundi
  Lullii.-- Rogeri Bachonis tractatus de speciebus.
        papyro, fº.

24. Alberti Magni de mineralibus libri quinque.-- Hermetis
  quadripartitum operis.-- Rhithmomachia.-- De lapide bezaar.-- Ars
  fusoria ac tinctoria lapidum ac gemmarum.-- Ptolomei liber de
  lapidibus et sigillis eorundem.-- Techel de sculpturis lapidum.--
  Galenus ( .... portis) de spermate.-- Avicennæ phisiognomia.--
  Commentariolus in Aristotelis phisiognomiam.-- Cheiromantiæ
  fragmentum.-- Arithmeticæ fragmentum, carmine.-- Practica algorismi.--
  Anima artis transmutatoriæ Ramundi.-- Phisica, seu medicina Ramundi
  Lullij.-- De herbis.-- De potentiis duodecim signorum et septem
  planetarum.-- Epistola accurtationis lapidis philosophorum ad Regem
  Robertum.-- Summa cheiromantiæ.-- Albertus Magnus de mineralibus.--
  Phisiognomia ex Loxio, Aristotele, et Palemone.-- Albertus de
  plantationibus arborum et de conservatione vini.-- Virtutes septem
  herbarum Aristotelis.-- Liber Kirimandarum.-- Philonis fragmentum de
  aquæductibus.-- Quæstiones quædam naturales.-- Constantinus Medicus de
  coitu.-- Practica puerorum.-- De natura puerorum.-- Introductiones
  astronomicæ.-- Hyppocrates de pharmacis.-- Hyppocrates de secretis.--
  Hippocratis lex.-- Hippocrates de humana natura.-- Hippocrates de
  aere, aqua, et regionibus.
        pergameno, 4º.

25. Eulogium temporis, a condito orbe in annum Christi 1367, monachi
  cujusdem Niniani.[5]
        pergameno, fº.

    [Footnote 5: Now MS. Cotton. Galba, E. VIII., partially burnt by
    the fire. Another copy of this work is in the library of Trinity
    College, Cambridge, R. vii. 2.]

26. Rogerii Bachonis summa, seu opus tertium, ad Clementem P.M.--
  Ejusdem Bachonis majoris operis pars quarta, in qua ostenditur
  potestas mathematicæ in scientiis atque rebus mundi hujus.-- Ejusdem
  compendium studii theologici.-- Liber præceptorum secundum Albertum.--
  Liber de sigillis solis in signis, secundum Hermetem.-- Albertus de
  sigillo et annulo leonis, et ejus virtutibus.-- Arnoldus de Villa Nova
  de sigillis duodecim signorum.
        papyro, fº.

27. Rogerii Bachonis communium naturalium libri duo, quatuor sectionibus
  distincti.
        pergameno, fº.

    In boards, with clasps.

28. Alpetraugii de verificatione motuum cœlestium liber.-- Thebith de
  his quæ indigent expositione, antequam legatur Almagestum Ptolomæi.--
  Liber florum Albumasar.-- Liber experimentorum Albumasar.-- Liber
  practicorum geometriæ.-- -Jacobi Alkindi liber de aspectibus.-- Petri
  de Dacia commentum super tractatum algorismi.-- Joh. de Sacrobosco
  super tractatum de sphæra.-- Ejusdem computus ecclesiasticus.--
  Wilhelmus de Aragonia in Ptolomæi centiloquium.-- Ars algorismi de
  fractionibus.-- Scripta utilia super computum manualem.-- Joh: de
  Sicilia in canones Arzachelis de tabulis Toletanis.-- Quæstiones
  mathematicales.[6]
        pergameno, fº.

    [Footnote 6: Now MS. Harl. 1, “Johannes Dee, 1557.” A portion of
    this volume formerly belonged to John of London.]

29. Richardi Walyngforde Abbatis S. Albani de sinubus demonstrandis,
  libri iv.[7]
        pergameno, fº.

    [Footnote 7: The only copies of this work now known are in the
    Bodleian Library, but I have not succeeded in tracing this one.]

30. Johannis Massoni Monachi epistolæ.-- Epistolæ de somnio Pharaonis,
  seu Pharaonis et Josephi epistolæ.-- Alani enchiridion de planctu seu
  conquestu naturæ, prosa et versu.-- Bernardi Silvestris Cosmographia.
  [8]
        pergameno, 4º.

    [Footnote 8: Otho, B. IV. vid. Tann. Bibl. p. 518. This MS. was
    destroyed in the fire of 1731.]

31. Bartholomei Anglici breviarium, seu de proprietatibus rerum.
        pergameno, fº.

32. Jordani Nemorarii Φιλοτεχνη, sive de triangulis, liber primus,
  sexaginta quatuor propositiones continens.
        pergameno, 4º.

33. Rabbi Mosis liber de venenis.-- Summa brevis Galeni de cura ethicæ
  senectutis.-- Alberti de Colonia tractatus de incisionibus arborum et
  plantationibus earum.-- Unguentum ad omnem scabiem tollendam, quod
  dicitur _Veni mecum_, &c.-- Tractatus de ornatu faciei.-- Hermetis
  liber de septem planetis, &c.-- Rogerii Bachonis nonnulla secreta.--
  De factura Saxonis Gallici.-- Liber de tincturis pannorum.-- Liber de
  coloribus illuminatorum vel pictorum.-- De diversis operationibus
  ignium.-- De diversis tincturis.-- Hermetis secreta.-- Item, multa
  alia notabilia.-- Item, turba philosophorum.
        pergameno, 4º.

34. Experimentorum diversorum liber.-- De vernisio quo utuntur
  scriptores.-- Secreta philosophorum.-- De usu virgæ visoriæ, et
  hujusmodi secreta multa.
        papyro, 8{vo}.

35. Arnaldi de Villa Nova thesaurus secretus operationum.-- Hermetis
  liber de lapide philosophorum.-- Alfredi liber de spiritu occultato.--
  Rasis practica, cum aliis viginti quinque libellis variorum autorum
  consimilis argumenti.
        papyro, 4º.

36. Ptolomæi quadripartitum, Lat.-- Albumazer introductorium.-- Isibradi
  calendarium.-- Profacii Judæi almanach.-- Zaëlis electiones.-- De
  significationibus planetarum, cum aliis tractatibus.
        pergameno, 4º.

37. Expositio theoricarum.-- Thebith de motu octavæ sphæræ.-- Jordanus
  de ponderibus, cum quæstionibus notabilibus super eundem.-- Jacobus
  Alkindus de radijs, seu de causis reddendis.-- An futura possunt per
  astra præsciri.-- Nicolai Oresmi liber divinationum.-- Thomæ
  Bravardini geometria.-- Perspectiva communis Joh. de Pecham.--
  Dominici de Hassia quæstiones super perspectivam communem.-- Euclides
  de speculis.-- Jacobus Alkindus de umbris et causis diversitatum
  aspectuum.-- Dominici de Clavaso practica geometriæ.-- Demonstratio
  æqualitatis lineæ ad peripheriam circuli.-- Quadratura circuli.--
  Expositio tractatus de sphæra, cum quæstionibus.-- Algorismus in
  integris Joh. de Sacro-Bosco.-- Algorithmus in minutiis Joh. de
  Lineriis.-- Thomæ Bravardini tractatus proportionum.

38. Joh. de Pecham canticum pauperum.-- Joh. Walensis communiloquium.--
  Ejusdem Walensis dietarium, locarium, itinerarium.-- Ejusdem
  breviloquium.-- Tractatus, cujus initium est, _Supra tribus
  sceleribus_.-- Aristotelis liber de secretis secretorum.
        pergameno, 4º.

39. Liber Physiologi de natura animalium et bestiarum.
        pergameno, 8º.

40. Gualteri Burlæi tractatus de potentiis animæ.
        pergameno, 4º.

41. Rogerii Bachonis perspectiva.-- Ejusdem de multiplicatione
  specierum.
        pergameno, 4º.

    In paste-bords, with strings.

42. Tractatuli tres de lapide philosophorum, quorum primi initium est,
  “Dicit philosophus,” &c.

43. Vectii Valentis anthologia.-- Aristoxeni musica.-- Alippii musica.--
  Cleomedes de mundo.-- Expositio astrolabii.-- Hipparchus in Aratum et
  Eudoxum.-- _Græcè omnes._
        papyro, fº.

44. Libellus antiquissimus de speculis comburentibus, cujus initium est,
  “De sublimiori,” &c.[9]
        pergameno, 4º.

    [Footnote 9: Now in MS. Vespas. A. II. art. 12, “Joannes Dee,
    1555.” This is an extremely curious and valuable tract in the
    history of optical science, and is similar to the curious treatise
    by Gogava _De speculo ustorio_. The focus of the parabola is here
    for the first time indicated, a circumstance which has escaped the
    notice of scientific historians.]

45. Jordanus de ponderibus cum scholiis, cujus initium est “Omnis
  ponderosi.”
        pergameno, fº.

46. Raymundi Lullii liber de quinta essentia.
        pergameno, fº.

47. Boetius de consolatione philosophiæ, in _Græcam_ linguam conversus a
  Maximo Planude.-- Catonis distica, cum scholiis Planudis, &c.
  _Græcè._-- Aphthonij progymnasmata, _Græcè_.
        papyro, fº.

    I gave this Booke to Cracovia Library, A{o}. 1584, July 28.

48. Porphirii philosophi Isagoge in Aristotelis logicam, _Græcè_.
        papyro, fº.

49. Naupegia Itali cujusdam, cum figuris.
        papyro, 4º.

50. Dionysii Zecharii opusculum de lapide philosophorum, _Gallicè_.
        papyro, 4º.

51. Roberti Gloucestrensis chronica, _rythmo Anglico_.[10]
        papyro, fº.

    [Footnote 10: The only MS. of Robert of Gloucester’s poem,
    answerable to this description, is in the University Library,
    Cambridge.]

52. Hystoria Britannicorum principum a Cadowaladro Rege ad Leolinum, per
  Humfredum Lluyd collecta, _Anglicè_.[11]
        papyro, fº.

    [Footnote 11: This MS. is now in the library of the Ashmolean
    Museum, No. 846.]

53. Variæ compositiones aquarum mercurialium et alia experimenta
  chemica, _Anglicè_, cujus initium est, “He that will make,” &c.
        papyro, 4º.

54. Varia experimenta chimica, _Anglicè_, quorum initium est, “For to
  make white lead.”
        pergameno, fº.

55. Alberti Magni summa naturalium, cujus initium est, “Philosophia
  dividitur.”
        papyro, 4º.

56. Rogerii Bachonis annotationes super Aristotelis tractatum de
  secretis secretorum.
        pergameno, fº.

57. Phillipi Ulstadii cœlum philosophorum.
        impressum, fº.

58. Inventa quædam geometrica.
        papyro, fº.

    My owne hand, of Richard Chancellor and Thomas Topely.

59. Dumbyltoni summa.
        pergameno, fº.

60. Beda de gestis Anglorum.
        pergameno, 4º.

61. Euclidis geometrica.-- Rogerii Bachonis perspectiva.-- Aristotilis
  problemata.-- Campani theoricæ planetarum.
        pergameno, 4º.

62. Volumina duo magna, _Hebraicè_, de astrologicis judiciis.-- Alchimia
  Salomonis.
        papyro, fº. 2 vol.

63. Roberti Groshed, Lincolniensis episcopi, dicta; quorum initium est,
  “Spiritus Sanctus per os Salomonis,” &c.-- Ejusdem tractatus de
  cessatione legalium.-- Ejusdem tractatus de oculo morali, una cum
  aliis variis.
        pergameno, fº.

64. Isaac Judæi logica, cum aliis variis consimilis argumenti,
  _Hebraicè_.
        papyro, 4º.

65. Alhazen perspectiva, &c.
        pergameno, 4º.

    John Davis’ spoyle.

66. Ramundi Lullii testamentum.-- Ejusdem cantilena.-- Ejusdem
  codicillus, sive vade mecum.-- Ejusdem anima transmutatoria.--
  Annotationes super testamentum Ramundi.-- Lapidarius Raymundi.--
  Quæstiones de Paulina Ramundi.-- Quæstiones de Olympiade Ramundi.--
  Declaratio tabularum figuræ 5. Ramundi.-- Repertorium Raymundi.--
  Tractatus de consideratione lapidis.-- Philosophia cujusdam
  Ramundistæ.-- Joh. Dastini chimici somnium, seu visiones, _Anglicè_.--
  Ramundi Lullii distinctio tertia.-- Anima artis, juxta exemplar in
  Anglia repertum.-- Apocalypsis spiritus secreti.-- Ars conversionis
  Mercurii et Saturni in aurum et argentum, seu de aquis Theuthidis.--
  Aristotelis lumen luminum.-- Raimundi Lullii quæstionarius arboris
  philosophalis.-- Quæstionarius figuræ quadrangularis.-- Quæstionarius
  figuræ 5.-- Tertia distinctio juxta aliud exemplar.-- Aphorismi.--
  Accurtatio.-- Practica secreti occulti.-- Opus magnum, sive opus
  regale.-- Considerationes operis minoris.-- Cantilena _Catalonicè_,
  cum commento.-- Ars brevis, &c.
        papyro, fº.

67. Ramundi Lulli speculum alchimiæ.-- Ejusdem liber de quinta
  essentia.-- Ejusdem lapidarius, scilicet de gemmis.-- Joh. Dastini
  liber de compositione lapidis.-- Ejusdem donum Dei.-- Liber radicum.--
  Liber administrationum.-- Ejusdem Dastini speculum philosophorum.--
  Rasis de duodecim aquis, &c.
        papyro, fº.

68. Aneti filii Abraham practica medica.-- Scarsati practica
  medicinalis, una cum aliis.
        pergameno, 4º.

69. Eathelredi Abbatis Rievallis de vita Edowardi regis Anglorum et
  Confessoris.[12]
        pergameno, 4º.

    [Footnote 12: Now MS. Harl. 200, “Joannes Dee, 1575.”]

70. Roberti episcopi Lincolniensis tractatus in lingua Romana, hoc est,
  _veteri rithmo Gallico_, de principio creationis mundi, de medio et
  fine, &c.
        pergameno, 4º.

71. Wilhelmi de Northfeilde expositio super librum de differentia
  spiritus et animæ.-- Ejusdem expositio super diversa opuscula
  Aristolelis phisicorum.[13]
        pergameno, fº.

    [Footnote 13: Now C.C.C. Oxon. No. 235.]

72. Magistri Franconis regulæ musicales, cum additionibus aliorum
  musicorum, collectæ a Roberto de Handlo.-- Rogerii Bachonis,
  perspectiva, una cum aliis geometricis et astrologicis.
        pergameno, fº.

73. Gualtheri Burlei notabilia super Porphyrii prædicabilia, et
  Aristotelis prædicamenta, una cum aliarum notationum libellis.
        papyro, 4º.

74. Boetii Musica.-- Hermannus Contractus de compositione astrolabii, et
  de ejus utilitatibus.
        pergameno, 4º.

75. Chronica de imperatoribus seu compendium historiarum in prima
  monarchia Babiloniorum, in annum Christi 1266.-- Joh. de Bononia summa
  pontificum Romanorum et imperatorum in annum Christi 1313.-- Alexandri
  Magni ortus et res gestæ.
        pergameno, 4º.

76. Wilhelmi Wodford, ordinis Minorum, opusculum quaestionum quarundam,
  contra dialogum Joh. Wycklyf a Thoma Cantuariensi archiepiscopo
  condemnatum.-- Thomas Palmere tractatus de imaginibus, cum aliis
  variis.
        papyro, 4º.

77. Collectanea quædam chimica Siberti Rhodii.
        papyro, fº.

78. Roberti Holcot quæstiones super quatuor libros Lombardi
  sententiarum.-- Ejusdem quæstiones de astronomia.
        pergameno, 4º.

79. Arnaldi de Villa Nova liber de alchimia, cujus initium est, “Scito,
  fili, quod in hoc libro,” una cum aliis ejusdem opusculis.
        papyro, 4º.

80. Ethici philosophi cosmographia, per D. Hieronymum Stredonem Lat.
  conversa.
        pergameno, fº.

81. Rogerii Bachonis epistolæ tres, sive scripta tria ad Joh.
  Parisiensem, in quibus latet sapientia mundi.-- Kalid rex ad
  Morienum.-- Gebri et Avicennæ chimica.
        papyro, 4º.

82. Euclidis elementorum geometricorum libri decem.-- Ejusdem
  perspectiva, &c. Lat.
        papyro, 4º.

83. Alhazeni perspectiva, libri septem, Lat.
        pergameno, fº.

84. De fabrica speculi ustorii fragmentum.-- Urso de effectibus
  qualitatum primarum.-- Liber vaccæ.-- Alberti dona.-- Thomas Aquinas
  de essentiis rerum.
        pergameno, 4º.

85. Ricardi Hampole liber, qui dicitur Incendium Amoris, _Anglicè_.
        pergameno, fº.

86. Alhazeni perspectiva, Lat.-- Item Alfraganus, &c. Lat.
        pergameno, fº.

87. Albumazar de judiciis astrologicis.
        pergameno, fº.

88. Jacobi Fabri Stapulensis conclusiones phisicæ, &c. ex Aristotele
  excerptæ.
        papyro, fº.

89. Joh. Eschuidi summa Anglicana, seu medicinalis.
        pergameno, fº.

90. Bartholomæus Anglicus de proprietatibus rerum.
                                              pergameno, f. grandiori.

91. Jordani Nemorarii arithmetica cum commento.-- Algorithmus in
  integris Joh. de Sacrobosco.-- Algorithmus in minutiis, Joh. de
  Lineriis.-- Campani theorica planetarum.-- Nicholai Oresmi tractatus
  de proportionibus proportionum.[14]-- Jordani tractatus de
  commensuratione cœlestium.-- Gervasii algorithmus proportionum.--
  Demonstrationes conclusionum astrolabii.-- Tractatus de torqueto et
  ejus usu.-- Tabulæ Alfonsi regis Castellæ.-- Canones tabularum Alfonsi
  per Joh. de Saxonia.-- Joh. de Lineriis canones tabularum primi
  mobilis.-- Jacob Alkindus de impressio[n]ibus aeris.-- Rogerii
  Bachonis de utilitate arithmeticæ.-- Campani compostus
  ecclesiasticus.-- Jordani algorithmus demonstratus.
        pergameno, fº.

    [Footnote 14: Extract from this article in MS. Bernard, 3467,
    where there are other extracts from MSS. in Dee’s possession.]

92. Helinandi Monachi Cistercien. chronicorum mundi libri XXX. hoc est,
  pars prima.
        pergameno, fº.

93. Francisci Catanei Diacetii paraphrasis in Aristotelem de cœlo, &c.
        pergameno, fº.

94. Isidori Hispalensis liber de natura rerum, cum glosulis.-- Prisciani
  institutio.-- Bedæ versus de die judicii.
        pergameno, 4º.

95. Tractatus de figuris stellarum in octava sphæra.-- Gebri libri novem
  de astronomia.-- Almagesti libri sex abbreviati.-- Jordani libri de
  triangulis.-- Plures conclusiones Almagisti abbreviati.-- Archimedis
  liber de curvis superficiebus.-- Tractatus Albeonis.-- Tabula pro
  locis planetarum.-- Tractatus Zaphei Arzachelis, &c.-- Capitula libri
  Almagesti.-- Compendium musices ex Boetio.-- Euclidis elementa
  geometrica.-- Gebri conclusiones de astronomia.-- Theodosii
  sphærica.-- Milei de figuris sphæricis et triangulis, libri tres.--
  Tabulæ planetarum de radicibus et motibus.-- Machumeti Bagdedini liber
  divisionum.-- Tractatus de quinque corporibus regularibus.-- Tractatus
  de speculis comburentibus.-- Tabula domificandi, pro latitudine
  Oxoniens.-- Tabulæ plurium latitudinum, secundum Bachecumbe.-- Thebith
  tractatus de motu.-- Tractatus de proportione circumferentiæ circuli,
  &c.-- Tabulæ quatuor solis.
        pergameno, fº.

96. Rogeri Bachonis tractatus de virtutibus et actionibus stellarum.
        papyro, 4º.

97. Vitellionis perspectiva.[15]
        pergameno, fº.

    [Footnote 15: Now MS. Ashm. No. 424. From a MS. note it appears
    that, in 1564, the Fellows of Peterhouse, at Cambridge, presented
    this book to Dr. Dee, in exchange for various printed books which
    he gave to their library. Vid. MS. C.C.C. Oxon. No. 191.]

98. Theodosii sphærica.-- Euclidis data, Lat.-- Archimides de quadratura
  circuli.
        pergameno, 4º.

99. Haly de judiciis astrorum.
        pergameno, fº.

100. Boetius de consolatione philosophiæ cum commento.-- Scripta super
  plures libros geometriæ.-- Jordanus de speculis.-- Jordanus de
  ponderibus.-- Archadii demonstrationes de quadratura circuli.--
  Tractatus Hermanni de astrolabio.-- Liber de similibus arcubus.--
  Archimedes de figuris isoperimetris.-- Archimedes de curvis
  superficiebus.
        pergameno, 4º.

101. Avicenna de prima philosophia, i.e. de causa causarum, vel
  metaphisica, Lat.
        pergameno, 4º.

102. Alhazeni perspectiva.
        pergameno, 4º.

103. Ricardi de Posis summa epistolarum (quasi ars quædam notariatus)
  secundum consuetudinem Romanæ curiæ.
        pergameno, fº.

104. Arzachelis tabulæ astronomicæ.
        pergameno, 4º.

105. Chronicon Angliæ, _Anglicè_, manuscriptum.
        pergameno, fº.

106. Aristotelis commentum in astrologiam (fragmentum).
        pergameno, 4º.

107. Alberti Magni minerarium.
        pergameno, 4º.

108. Haly de judiciis astrorum.-- Liber novem judicum in astrologia.--
  Jafar de imbribus.-- Messahala de nativitatibus.-- Aristotelis liber
  de judiciis universalibus.-- Hani Benhannæ liber de geometria.-- Guido
  Bonatus de astrologio.[16]
        papyro, fº. magno.

    [Footnote 16: Now MS. Savil. Oxon. No. 15.]

109. Algorithmus integrorum cum commento.-- Algorithmus fractorum cum
  commento.-- Summa utriusque arithmeticæ Boetii.-- Arithmetica
  compilata ex multis scientiis.-- Liber de figuris numerorum.--
  Practica memorandi.-- Tractatus de speculo combustorio secundum
  sectionem Mukesij.-- Euclidis geometricorum libri 15. cum commento.--
  Jordanus de ponderibus cum commento.-- Euclides de ponderibus cum
  commento.-- Euclidis datorum liber cum commento.-- Archimedes de
  curvis superficiebus cum commento.-- Archimedes de quadratura circuli,
  cum commento.-- Archimede[s] de figuris ysoperimetrorum.-- Theodosii
  sphærica.-- Rob. Lincoln[i]ensis episcopi, de luce, calore, et
  iride.-- Vitellionis perspectivæ libri quatuor.
        pergameno, fº.

110. Rob. Lincoln[i]ensis episcopi constitutiones pro sua diocesi,
  videl. in decalogum, &c.
        pergameno, fº.

111. Perspectiva Algazet, forte Halazen. Lat.
        pergameno, 4º.

112. Annales regulorum Cambricorum, a Cadowaladro, ad Leolini tempora,
  _lingua Brytannica sive Cambrica_.
        papyro, 4º.

113. Perquisita et alia quæ pertinebant ad Winchecumbe Abbatiam.[17]
        pergameno, 4º.

    [Footnote 17: It does not appear from Tanner’s _Notitia Monastica_,
    or from Sir Thomas Phillipps’s Catalogue, that this MS. is now
    preserved.]

114. Boetii arithmetica.
        pergameno, 4º.

115. Quæstiones erudite disputatæ super librum meteororum Aristotelis.
        pergameno, 4º.

116. De Indorum et Persarum annis astronomicis.-- Annotationes in
  Martianum Capellam.
        pergameno, 4º.

117. De potentiis animæ.-- Auberti Remensis philosophia.-- Oliveri
  philosophia.-- Petrus Hispanus de morte et vita, et causis
  longitudinis et brevitatis vitæ.-- Albertus de divinatione. De spiritu
  et inspiratione.-- De signis aquarum, ventorum et tempestatum.--
  Ramundus Massiliensis de cursu planetarum.-- Alexander Aphrodiseus ad
  imperatores Antoninum et Severum de fato.-- Quæstiones de
  intellectu.-- Quæstiones de anima.-- Hermannus Secundus de
  essentiis.-- Platonis Phædon, sive de anima.-- Commentum super
  Platonis Timæum.-- Platonis Menon. Lat.
        pergameno, fº.

118. De administratione principum liber.
        pergameno, 4º.

119. Isidori Hispalensis etymologiarum fragmentum magnum.
        pergameno, fº.

120. Tabulæ astronomicæ ad annos decem, cum canonibus.-- Algorithmus
  demonstratus cum minutiis.-- Alfraganus de annis.-- Alcabicii
  astrologia.-- Tabulæ de numeris proportionalibus.-- Computus cum
  calendario.
        pergameno, 4º.

121. Polychronica.
        pergameno, fº.

122. Polychronicon.
        pergameno, fº minori.

123. Hystoriæ Britannicæ et Angliæ fragmentum, _Gallicè_ conscriptum.
        pergameno, 4º.

124. Guido Bonatus de judiciis astrorum.
        pergameno, fº.

125. Passionale.
        pergameno, fº.

126. Astronomici libelli cujusdam fragmentum, cujus initium est, “A
  philosophis astronomiam sic definitam accepimus.”
        pergameno, 4º.

127. Expositio quædam super Cantica Canticorum.-- Ars fidei secundum
  Ambionensem.-- Macrobius in somnium Scipionis.
        pergameno, fº.

    The second tract is cut out, and to be answered for.

128. Matricula, sive catalogus bibliothecæ Cantuariensis.
        papyro, fº.

129. Author de causis cum demonstrationibus.
        pergameno, fº.

130. Alchimicus libellus, _Anglicè_, cujus initium est, “Take limale.”
        papyro, 4º.

131. Libellus chimicus, _Latinè_.-- Varii tractatus super capitulum
  Hermetis quod dicitur “Clavis Sapientiæ Majoris.”
        pergameno, fº.

132. Sidrach philosophi liber, _Gallicè_.
        pergameno, 4º.

133. Kallendarium.-- Quædam de computu ecclesiastico, _Latinè et
  Saxonicè_.-- Alphabetum somniale.-- Præces quædam piæ.[18]
        pergameno, 8º.

    [Footnote 18: The MS. described by Wanley, p. 222, as MS. Cotton.
    Vitell. A. XVIIJ. now destroyed, is probably the one here
    mentioned. The Cotton. MS. Jul. A. VJ. also answers the brief
    description above given.]

134. Lectiones cujusdam super Ecclesiasticen.
        pergameno, fº.

135. Commentarius bonus in definitiones quinti libri Euclidis.--
  Euclides totus ex Campani traditione.-- Explicatio bona Archimedis de
  quadratura circuli.
        pergameno, 4º.

136. Cicero de natura deorum.-- Catonis liber ad Varronem.-- Euclidis
  liber cum commento.-- Preceptum canonum Ptolomæi.-- Tractatus
  astrolabii duplicis cum practica.-- Tabulæ astronomicæ.-- Aristotelis
  epistola de rectitudine vitæ, ad Alexand.-- Henrici Britton
  philosophia.-- Oliveri Britton philosophia.-- Philosophia Remensis et
  aliorum.-- Liber de speculis, liber de visu, et quædam alia.
        pergameno, 4º.

137. Boetii arithmetica.-- Ejusdem de trinitate libri.-- Ejusdem de
  duobus in Christo naturis.-- Ejusdem de hebdomadibus.-- Rob.
  Grostesti, Lincolniensis episcopi, de arte algorismi communi.--
  Ejusdem alius tractatus magis in speciali.-- Thebith super Almagistum
  Ptolomæi.-- Theodosius de locis habitabilibus.-- Theoria planetarum
  cum tabulis necessariis.-- Commentum super Centiloquium Ptolomæi.--
  Ars cheiromantiæ, _in Gallico sermone_.-- De interpretationibus
  somniorum.-- De significationibus tonitruorum.-- Physiognomia secundum
  Thomam Aquinatem.-- De prognosticationibus tempestatum.-- De pluribus
  necessariis ad casus inquirendos secundum algorismum.-- Cheiromantia,
  Lat.[19]
        pergameno, 4º.

    [Footnote 19: Now in Trinity College, Dublin. See Dr. Bernard’s
    Catalogue, No. 46.]

138. Astronomica, astrologica, et arithmetica.-- Observationes quædam
  planetarum et fixarum, Petri de Sancto Audomaro et Joh. de Lineriis.
        pergameno, 4º.

139. Tabulæ astronomicæ cum canonibus.
        pergameno, 8º.

140. Libellus de natura locorum.
        pergameno, 8º.

141. Ivonis Carnutensis varii tractatus ecclesiastici, et volumen
  epistolarum diversorum ad diversos, &c.
        pergameno, fº.

142. Boetii musica.-- Expositio Simonis de Bredon super duos libros
  arithmeticæ Boetii.
        pergameno, 4º.

143. Calcidius in Platonis Timæum.[20]
        pergameno, 4º long.

    [Footnote 20: Now MS. Bib. Reg. Mus. Brit. 12 B. XXII, “Johannes
    Dee, 1557, 4 Maij, Londini.”]

144. Marii de elementis libri duo.-- Liber qui dicitur Prenonphysicon.--
  Alardi Bathoniensis quæstiones naturales.-- Physiognomia secundum tres
  authores, videlicet, Loxum, Aristotelem, et Palemonem.-- Liber
  spermatis.-- Soranus de re medica.-- Constantini liber de herbis.--
  Dioscorides de virtutibus herbarum, Lat.-- Oribasius de virtutibus
  herbarum, Lat.-- Odonis Adunensis versus de virtutibus herbarum.--
  Isidori Hyspalensis etymologiarum libri.-- Constantini Medici liber
  graduum.-- Euphonis experimenta.-- Adamarii experimenta.-- Joh.
  Melancholici experimenta.-- Experimenta Abbatis.-- Experimenta
  Wiscardi.-- Experimenta Picoti.-- De urina mulieris.-- Expositio
  quintæ incisionis epidemiarum Hippocratis.-- Joh. Melancholici liber
  de substantia urinæ.-- Palladius de agricultura.-- Liber de simplici
  medicina.
        pergameno, fº.

145. Alberti Magni magia naturalis et vera.-- Idiotæ liber, authore
  Cusano.-- Contra Jacobellinos in Bohemia.-- Antonii Barsizii
  cauteriaria, comedia, una cum aliis variis.
        papyro, fº.

146. Aristotelis physicorum libri octo.-- Ejusdem de generatione et
  corruptione, lib. 2.-- De cœlo et de mundo, libri 4.-- Meteorum
  libri 4.-- De vegetabilibus, &c.-- De anima, libri tres.-- De memoria
  et reminiscentia.-- Ethicorum secundus et tertius.-- De morte et vita,
  et alia ejusdem Aristotelis, Latinè.
        pergameno, 4º.

147. Serapionis de aptatione et repressione, seu servitor Serapionis.
        pergameno, fº.

148. Thomas de Aquino de veritate theologica, libri septem.
        pergameno, 4º.

149. Alberti magni tractatus de lapidibus.-- Jacobus Alkindus de radiis.
        papyro, fº.

150. Historia Anglica cujusdam anonymi.
        papyro, 4º.

151. Euclidis optica, catoptrica, et geometria, Lat.
        pergameno, 4º.

152. Fragmentum theologicum quoddam in Ecclesiasticum.
        pergameno, fº.

153. Tractatus astrolabij.-- De significatione rei occultæ.-- De aeris
  dispositione.-- Tabula pro almanack.-- Ars notaria.-- Aristotelis
  epistola de conservatione sanitatis.-- Rogeri Herefordensis
  computus.-- Compositio astrolabii.-- Planisphærium.-- Alfraganus.--
  Geber in Ptolomæi almagestum, una cum aliis.
        pergameno, 4º.

154. Apologia chemicæ artis, contra Cornelium Agrippum de vanitate
  scientiarum.-- De oleis variis medicinalibus, una cum aliis multis.
        papyro, 4º.

155. Alcabicius.-- Astronomia quædam judicialis.-- Zahelis
  introductorium, cum judiciis sequentibus.-- Mathematica Alexandri
  summi astrologi.-- Jacob Alkindus de judiciis astrologicis.--
  Albumazar de revolutionibus annorum mundi.-- Summæ excerptæ ex libro
  Albumazar, de revolutione nativitatum.-- Albohali de nativitatibus.--
  Albumazar liber florum.-- Almanack perpetuum Profacii Judæi.-- Thomas
  Aquinas de angelis.[21]
        4º pergameno.

    [Footnote 21: This MS. is now in the Ashmolean collection,
    No. 360.]

156. Lamentationes Mathæoluli, carmine.[22]
        pergameno, 4º.

    [Footnote 22: This is probably the copy now in MS. Cotton.
    Cleopatra, C. IX. I know of no other which answers the
    description.]

157. Hippocratis aphorismi.-- Ejusdem prognostica.-- Ejusdem liber de
  regimine acutorum.-- Ejusdem liber epidemiarum.-- Ejusdem astronomia
  de infirmitatibus.-- Johannicii isogoge in Galeni Tecknin.--
  Hyppocratis secreta.-- Tractatus de compositione astrolabii.--
  Tractatus de practica astrolabii.-- Tractatus de compositione novi
  quadratis.-- Campani tractatus de motibus planetarum et de
  fabricatione equatorii instrumenti per quod certa loca planetarum
  inveniuntur.-- Petri Perigrini tractatus de magnete.[23]-- Jordani
  liber Planisphærii.-- Euclidis liber de speculis.-- Jordani tractatus
  de ponderibus.-- Practica geometriæ.
        pergameno, 4º.

    [Footnote 23: Dee’s own copy of the printed edition, with his MS.
    notes, is in the British Museum. “Johannes Dee, 1562.”]

158. Rogerii Bachonis calendarium.-- Tabula ad sciendum quis planeta
  dominetur omni hora cujus libet diei.-- Tabula multiplicationis.--
  Liber de naturis rerum abreviatus.-- Marbodeus de sculpturis
  gemmarum.-- Liber de lapidibus filiorum Israel.-- Hippocratis signa in
  infirmo.-- Unguentum alabastri.-- De modo faciendi olei.-- De aquis
  mundificativis oculorum faciei, et aliorum spiritualium membrorum.--
  De pilatoria.-- Ut pili nascantur ubi volueris.-- De conservatione
  vini.-- Gregorii dialogorum liber primus et secundus.-- Vita Sancti
  Nicholai.-- Vita Sancti Ægidij.
        pergameno, 4º.

159. Computus ecclesiasticus.-- Beda de calculatione.-- Computus.
        pergameno, 4º.

160. Wilhelmi de Conchis philosophia.[24]
        pergameno, 4º.

    [Footnote 24: Now MS. Bib. S. Joh. Coll. Cantab. G. 3. “Johannes
    Dee, 1557, 4 Maii.”]

161. Quæstiones super elenchos, et alia logicalia.
        papyro, 4º.

162. Quæstiones de apparentiis, seu fallaciis sophisticis, manuscriptæ.
        papyro.

163. Alberti de Saxonia tractatus proportionum, 4º impressus
  Rothomagi.-- Jacobi Lupi tractatus de productionibus personarum in
  divinis, secundum mentem Joh. Scoti, 4º impressum.-- Una cum aliis
  tractatibus variarum quæstionum,--
        papyro manuscript. 4º.

164. Henrici Beaumundi regimen sanitatis, cum aliis variis experimentis,
  tam _Anglicè_ quam Latinè scriptis.
        pergameno, 4º.

165. Avicenna de naturalibus.-- Ejusdem de sufficientia.-- Thomæ de
  Aquino tractatus de essentia.-- Avendauth de quinque universalibus.--
  Alchindi philosophi de quinque essentiis, ex verbis Aristotelis
  abstractus liber.-- Platonis Timæus.-- Isaac de diffinitionibus,
  Lat.-- Jacob de rationali in anima.-- Alexandri Philosophi de
  intellectu et intelligibili liber, Lat.-- Algacelis logica.--
  Alchindus de intellectu et intellecto.-- Amaometh liber introductorius
  in artem logicam demonstrationis.-- Averrhois de substantia orbis.--
  Alfarabius de intellectu et intellecto.-- Liber planetarum cujusdam
  discipuli Ptolomæi.-- Mercurius Trismegistus.-- Secundus Philosophus
  de diffinitionibus.-- Boetius de unitate.-- Liber de differentia
  spiritus et animæ.-- Liber metaphisicæ Avicennæ, qui non est
  completus.

166. De philosophia Salomonis.-- Fulgentius episcopus ad Calcidium
  Grammaticum.-- Experimenta quædam alchimica.-- Cassiodorus de anima,
  una cum aliis theologicis.
        pergameno, 8º.

167. Boetii arithmetica.-- Theorica planetarum et stellarum secundum
  Alfraganum.-- Boetii musica.-- Euclidis geometrica.-- Propositiones
  planisphærii Ptolomæi cum additionibus.-- Maslem Arabis.[25]
        pergameno, 4º.

    [Footnote 25: Now MS. Lambeth, No. 67. Dee’s autograph has been
    erased from the fly-leaf, but “1558, 30 Junii, Londini,” remains
    in his handwriting.]

168. Disputatio inter militem et clericum.
        pergameno, 4º.

169. Joh. Scoti quæstiones super secundo et tertio libro Aristotelis de
  anima.-- Antonii Andreæ quæstiones in Aristotelis meteora.
        papyro, 4º.

170. Isidori Hispalensis liber differentiarum.-- Cic. academicæ
  quæstiones.-- Ejusdem natura deorum.-- Ejusdem de divinatione.--
  Ejusdem de fato.-- Ejusdem paradoxa.-- Ejusdem Philippicæ orationes.--
  Libellus de bestiis, avibus, et arboribus.-- Salustius de bello
  Catilinario et Jugurthino.-- Vegetius de re militari, &c.
        pergameno, 4º.

171. Computus Ecclesiasticus.
        pergameno, 8º.

172. Solinus de mirabilibus mundi.
        pergameno, 4º.

173. Bona gesta Mariæ.-- Maleus, &c.
        pergameno, 16º.

174. Sortilegia nugatoria.
        pergameno, 8º.

175. Sortilegia nugatoria.
        pergameno, 4º.

176. Joh. Sarisberiensis policraticum, sive de nugis curialium et
  vestigiis philosophorum, libri octo.
        pergameno, 4º.

177. Computus manualis, cum aliis sexaginta quinque tractatibus variorum
  autorum in medicinalibus, physicis, astronomicis, et aliis.
        pergameno, 8º.

178. Gebri summa alchimiæ.
        pergameno, 4º.

179. Hermetis cujusdam libellus de rebus universalibus.
        pergameno, 4º.

180. Imago mundi, cujus initium est, “Operatio divina.”
        pergameno, 4º.

181. Thomæ Bravardini Anglici propositiones geometriæ.
        pergameno, 4º.

182. Macer de virtutibus herbarum.
        pergameno, 4º.

183. Libellus medicinæ et chirurgiæ, partim Latinè, partim _Anglicè_,
  partim etiam _Gallicè_.
        pergameno, 16º.

184. Ramundi Lulii practica chimica, _Anglicè_.[26]
        papyro, 4º.

    [Footnote 26: Now MS. Sloan. 2128.]

185. Alchimica; videlicet tres tractatus alchimici, Volvi lapidem, &c.--
  De quinta essentia Mercurii.-- Secretum secretorum Pleri philosophi.
        pergameno, 4º.

186. Roberti Lincolniensis episcopi, de luce, de iride, cum multis
  aliorum tractatis circiter 34.
        pergameno, 4º.

    A thick booke with a labell.

187. Libri diversi astrologici, quoram primi initium est, “Postulata a
  Domino.”
        pergameno, 4º.

188. Rogeri Bachonis, Morieni Romani, Joh. Viennensis, Alberti Magni,
  Hermetis, Rasis, Hortulani, chimica quædam.
        pergameno, 8º.

189. Speculum secretorum, cum aliis haud contemnendis chemicis
  fragmentis.
        pergameno, 4º.

190. Joh. de Sacrobosco sphæra.-- Johannicii glossulæ, cum aliis
  tractatibus.-- Rogeri Bachonis et Rob. Lincolniensis episcopi, &c.
        pergameno, 4º.

191. Libellus chimicus, cujus initium est, “Materia lapidis.”
        papyro, 8º.

192. Jacobi Alkindi de pluviis, imbribus, ventis, et de mutatione aeris.
        papyro, fº.

193. Liber duodecim aquarum, &c.[27]
        pergameno, 4º.

    [Footnote 27: Now in Magdalen College, Oxford, No. 277.]

194. Ægidii de Wallecers computus, de cometis, de crepusculis.-- Tabulæ
  domorum et ascensionum.-- Kallendarii errores.-- Jo. de Pecham
  perspectiva communis.-- 30 Arabes, qui dicuntur Magistri
  probationum.-- Tractatus minutiarum, una cum aliis.
        pergameno, 8º.

195. Abraham Judæi liber de judiciis nativitatum, cum aliis variis.
        papyro, 4º.

196. Albertus de mineralibus, cujus initium est, “De mixtione et
  coagulatione,” &c.-- Rogerii Bachonis epistola prima ad Joh.
  Parisiensem.-- Summa aurea, una cum multorum aliorum tractatibus.
        pergameno, 4º.

    In a black cover with clasps.

197. Ludus astronomicus.
        papyro, 8º.

198. Parisiensis liber, cujus initium est, “Augustinus de Civitate Dei,”
  &c.
        papyro, 4º.

199. Pomum Ambræ.-- Trotulæ de ornatu mulierum.-- Ascarus Philosophus de
  signis mulierum.-- De secretis mulierum, cum aliis experimentis.--
  Theophilus Monachus de coloribus.-- Eraclius de coloribus et artibus
  Roman.-- Quædam experimenta medica, cum aliis superstitiosis.--
  Compositio et usus astrolabii, una cum aliis.
        pergameno, 8º.

  [_In that part of the Catalogue describing the printed Books, under
  the title of “Chemici Libri, &c. Compacti,” occur the following
  Manuscripts._]

200. Ramundi Lulii ars generalis, cum quæstionibus ejusdem.-- De
  medi[ci]na et astronomia ejusdem.-- Speculum medicinæ.
        4º.

201. Ramundi Lulii ars magna cum figuris.-- Ejusdem ars generalis, cum
  quæstionibus.-- Ejusdem introductorium sive canones artis generalis.--
  Ejusdem de principiis et medicinæ gradibus.-- Ejusdem de regiminibus
  sanitatis et infirmitatis.
        fº.


A CATALOGUE OF SUCH OF DR. DEE’S MSS. AS ARE COME TO MY HANDS.

  [By Elias Ashmole.][28]

    [Footnote 28: From Ashmole’s MSS. No. 1790, fol. 52ª.]

1. Mysteriorum liber primus, 1581, et 1582.
  It begins 22 Dec. 1581, and ends 15 March 1582.

2. Mysteriorum liber secundus.
  The first leafe is utterly perished. It ends 21 March, 1582.

3. Mysteriorum liber tertius.
  It begins 28 April 1582, and ends 4 May, following.

4. Liber Mysteriorum quartus.
  It began 15 Nov. 1582, but the first leafe is lost. It ends 21 Nov.
  following.

5. Liber Mysteriorum quintus, 1583.
  It begins 23 March 1583, and ends 18 April following.

6. Quinti libri Mysteriorum appendix.
  It begins 20 April 1583, and ends 23 May following.

Note that some other of his bookes were set forth by Dr. Casaubon 1659,
and the first action (in them) begins 5 daies after the last action of
the foresaid appendix, viz. 28 May 1583, Which are these that follow.

7. Liber sexti Mysteriorum (et sancti) parallelus novalisque.
  It begins 28 May 1583, and ends 4 July following.

8. Liber Peregrinationis Primæ (sexti Mystici paradromus).
  It begins 21 Sept. 1583, and ends 13 March 1584.

9. Mensis Mysticus Sabbaticus, pars prima ejusdem.
  It begins 10 April 1584, and ends the 30 of that moneth.

10. Libri Mystici Apertorii Cracoviensis Sabbatici 1584.
  But in Dr. Dee’s MS. (from which it was printed) it hath this title,
    Libri septimi Apertorii Cracoviensis, Mystici Sabbatici, pars
    tertia, A{o}. 1584.
  And beside hath this note, Liber quartus decimus.
    The first action in this booke begins 7 May 1584, and ends 22 May
    following.

11. Libri Septimi Apertorij Cracoviensis Mystici Sabbatici pars quarta.
  It begins 23 May 1584, and ends 12 July following.

12. Libri Cracoviensis Mysticus Apertorius.
  In the originall MS. it hath this marginall note, “Sive potius, pars
  quinta libri 7{mi} &c. Cracoviensis.”
    The first action in this booke begins 12 July 1544, and ends 15
    August following.

13. Mysteriorum Pragensium liber primus Cæsareusque.
  It begins 15 Aug. stilo novo, 1584. At the bottome of the first leafe
  in the MS. is written, Liber 19us.
    The last action in this booke is the 7th of Oct. 1584.

14. Mysteriorum Pragensium Confirmatio.
  The first action begins 14 Jan, 1585, and ends the 20 of March
  following.

15. Mysteriorum Pragensium Confirmatorum liber.
  This booke begins 20 Mar. 1585, and ends 6 June following.

16. Unica Actio; quæ Pacciæna vocatur. A{o}. 1585, Aug. 6.

17. Liber Resurectionis, to which the MS. adds, et 42 Mensium
    Fundamentum.
  It begins the 30 of April 1586.
    Actio prima et secunda ex septem: is also added in MS. The last
    action in this booke is 21 Jan. 1587.

18. Actio tertia. Mysteriorum divinorum memorabilia, ab actionis (ex
    septem) tertiæ, descriptæ exordio, cui dies 4º Aprilis, A{o} 1587,
    dicata fuit.
  It begins 4 April 1587, and ends 23 May following.
    Thus far from the Printed Booke.


OTHER MANUSCRIPTS.

19. 48 Claves Angelicæ.
  This booke is writen in the Angelick language. Interlined with an
  English translation.
    Cracoviæ ab Aprilis 13 ad Julii 13 (diversis temporibus) receptæ,
    A{o}. 1584. At the bottome of the title page. Liber 18.

20. Liber Scientiæ, Auxilii et Victoriæ Terrestris.
  Maij 2, stilo novo, 1585 collectus ex præmissis in lib. 10, et aliis.

21. De Heptarchia Mystica Collectaneorum, Lib: primus.

22. Liber Enoch. I suppose Liber Logaeth and this are all one, but in
    the MS. I copied myne from (which I borrowed from Sir John Cotton)
    it hath this Title, Liber Mysteriorum Sextus et Sanctus, Liber 8.

23. A Booke of Supplications and Invocations.




INDEX TO THE DIARY.


Abbot (Mr.),                                                  49.
Addenstall (John),                                            59.
Agar (Mr.),                                                   54.
Alaski (Prince Albert),                               28, 43, 46.
  Salutes Dr. Dee,                                            19.
  Comes to London,                                            20.
  Makes acquaintance with Dr. Dee,                           _ib._
  Visits Dr. Dee twice,                                      _ib._
  Returns home,                                               21.
  Goes to Trebona and Warsaw,                                 22.
  Gives money to Dr. Dee,                                     23.
  Goes to Trebona and Cremona,                               _ib._
  Goes to Trebona and Prague,                                 27.
Alles (Mr.),                                                  11.
Alred (Richard),                                          48, 52.
Anderson (Lord),                                              40.
Anderson (Margaret), birth,                                    2.
Anthony (Mr.),                                                63.
Arnold (Edmund),                                          60, 61.
Arnold (Richard),                                             62.
Arundell (Mr.), birth,                                         1.
Ashley (Mr.), visits Dr. Dee,                                 42.
  Returns home,                                               43.
Ashley (Mrs.),                                                49.
  Visits Dr. Dee,                                             42.
  Returns home,                                               43.
Ashmole (Elias),                                              38.
Ashton (James),                                           55, 64.
Ask (John),                                                2, 48.
Aspland (William),                                            38.
Aubrey (Dr.),                                         15, 39, 49.
  Death,                                                      52.
Aubrey (John),                                            32, 52.
Aubrey (Mrs.),                                                 6.

Bacon (Mr.),                                                  16.
Baguely (Nicholas),                                           55.
Bagwell (Nicholas),                                           54.
Baily (Francis),                                               4.
Baldwyn (Richard),                                            52.
Banister (Mrs.),                                              46.
Banks (Mr.),                                                  54.
Barber (Robert),                                              58.
Bardman (Isabelle),                                           56.
Barlow (Mr.),                                                 60.
Barnes (Mr.), conference with Dr. Dee
    respecting the North-West passage,                        19.
Barret (Mr.),                                             49, 60.
Barret (Mrs.),                                                49.
Barwick (Nurse)                                       34, 35, 36.
Basset (John),                                        24, 28, 58.
  Tutor to Dr. Dee’s children,                                23.
  Quarrel with Thomas Kelly,                                  24.
Baxter (Mr.),                                                 61.
Bayly (Dr.),                                                   5.
Baynton (Mr.),                                                52.
Beale (Mr.),                                          18, 38, 46.
Beale (Mrs.),                                             46, 53.
Beck (William),                                               47.
Bedell (Mr.)                                                  38.
Bedford (The Earl of), visits Dr. Dee,                         2.
Bele, _v._ Beale.
Benet (Mrs.),                                                 12.
Berran (Mr.),                                                 54.
Besbich (Thomas),                                              3.
Beston (Mrs.),                                                56.
Bettgran (Mr.),                                               18.
Biberstein (Lord), makes acquaintance with Dr. Dee,           23.
  Goes to Trebona,                                            24.
Bigs (Mr.),                                                   14.
Billings (Thomas),                                            64.
Billingsley (Henry),                                          29.
Birch (George),                                           61, 64.
Birch (Robert),                                               62.
Blayney (John),                                               52.
Blunt (Sir Charles),                                          45.
Blunt (Francis),                                          44, 45.
Blunt (Sir Michael),                                          44.
Bodin (John),                                                 10.
Boordman (Elizabeth),                                         58.
Booth (Sir George),                                       58, 63.
Booth (Lady),                                                 58.
Bradley (Captain),                                            59.
Bradshaw (Mr.),                                       57, 58, 60.
Bragden (Edward),                                             15.
Brandeburgh (Marquis of),                                     47.
Brayce (Mrs.),                                                34.
Brogreton (Mr.),                                              55.
Broke (George),                                       52, 60, 61.
Bromley (Mr.),                                                13.
Browne (John),                                         2, 11, 58.
Brunswick (the Duke of),                                      22.
Brydock (Ed.),                                                61.
Buckhurst (Lord),                                             51.
Bull (Mr.),                                                   50.
Bullock (Mr.),                                                 5.
Burch (Mr.),                                                  60.
Burghley (Lord),                      17, 35, 37, 39, 40, 41, 50.
  Consultation with Dr. Dee,                                   9.
  Sends Dr. Dee some venison,                                 10.
  Dr. Dee dedicates his work on the calendar to him,          19.
  Illness,                                                    42.
Burrough (William),                                           21.
Burton (Mr.),                                                  7.
Byron (John),                                                 55.
Byron (Sir John),                                             55.
  Dispute with Manchester College,                            56.

Cæsar (Dr.),                                                  60.
Camaiere (Cornelio),                                      46, 47.
Camden (William),                                             40.
Candish (Richard),                                 6, 34, 36, 37.
  Visits Dr. Dee,                                             33.
  Dr. Dee gives him a copy of Paracelsus,                     35.
Candish (Thomas), visits Dr. Dee,                             34.
Canterbury (Archbishop of),                   15, 34, 35, 36, 37,
                                                  40, 42, 48, 49,
                                                  50, 51, 60, 61.
Carolius,                                                     42.
Carpe (John),                                             29, 30.
  Goes to Prague,                                             24.
  Makes furnaces,                                            _ib._
  Comes to Trebona,                                           26.
  Goes to Prague,                                             27.
Carter (Oliver),                          40, 53, 57, 59, 62, 64.
Cary (Sir George),                                        33, 34.
Cater (Mr.), visits Dr. Dee,                                   8.
Cave (Mr.),                                                   52.
Cecil (Sir Robert),                                   40, 49, 55.
Cecil (Sir Thomas),                                           40.
Chaloner (Sir Thomas),                                        44.
Charles (Robert),                         41, 44, 46, 52, 60, 61.
Chester (Bishop of),                                          62.
Chetham (Edmund),                                             64.
Childe (Mr.),                                             45, 50.
Childe (Mrs.),                                                47.
Cholmeley (John),                                 41, 58, 59, 60.
Chritzin (Captain),                                           27.
Clement (Mr.),                                                17.
Clerkson (Mr.),                                               14.
Clinton (Lord),                                                7.
Cobham (Lady),                                        33, 34, 41.
Cobham (Lord),                                            40, 41.
Coke, _v._ Cooke.
Cole (Ellen),                                             12, 13.
Collens (Thomas),                                         12, 38.
Colman (Mr.),                                                 47.
Constable (Mary), wages paid,                                  8.
Cooke (Bridget), birth,                                        2.
Cooke (John), Sir Humphrey Gilbert
    and Dr. Dee dines with him,                                8.
Cooke (Roger),                                            63, 64.
  The secret of the elixir revealed to him by Dr. Dee,         7.
  His violent bearing towards Dr. Dee,                        11.
  His quarrel with Dr. Dee,                                   12.
  His departure from Mortlake,                                13.
Cooper (Edmund),                                              28.
Cooper (Jane), birth,                                          1.
Cosener (Mr.),                                                53.
Coverts (Mr.),                                                17.
Coweller (Mr.),                                                8.
Cowly (Anthony),                                              55.
  Unfriendly to Dr. Dee,                                      32.
Cracht,                                                       24.
Cradocke (Dr.),                                               13.
Crane (Fr.),                                                   2.
Crocker (John),                                   33, 57, 58, 60.
Crofts (Sir James),                                           11.
Crofts (Lady Catherine),                                   8, 11.
Crowne (Mr.),                                                 53.
Cumber (Mr.),                                                 36.
Cumberland (Countess of),                                 47, 53.
Cunstable (Mary), supernatural fire,                           7.
Curtes (Mr.),                                                 56.
Cutcheth (William),                                           59.

Dale (Roger),                                                 45.
Dalton (Mr.),                                                 34.
Damport (Humphrey),                                       60, 63.
Darant (Nurse),                                                8.
David (Griffith),                                             57.
Davis (Mr.),                                                  63.
Davis (Mrs.),                                                 53.
Davyes (Alise),                                               11.
Davys (John), Reconciled to Dr. Dee,                           6.
  Abuses Mr. Emery,                                            7.
  Conference with Dr. Dee about the North-west passage,   18, 19.
  Goes to Chelsea and Devonshire,                             19.
Day (Mr.),                                                    51.
Dee (Anthony),                                                37.
Dee (Arnold),                                         52, 54, 60.
Dee (Arthur),                             14, 34, 39, 42, 46, 64.
  Born,                                                        4.
  Christened,                                                _ib._
  Illness,                                                     7.
  Weaned,                                                      8.
  His fall,                                                   16.
  Wounded with a razor,                                       28.
  Accidentally hurt,                                          38.
  Sent to Westminster school,                                 40.
  Accidentally hurt at fencing,                               60.
Dee (Aubrey),                                                 55.
Dee (Catherine),                      34, 39, 42, 46, 57, 63, 64.
  Born,                                                       11.
  Baptised,                                                  _ib._
  Sent home,                                                  12.
  Her nurse paid,                                             13.
  Illness,                                                    16.
  Accidentally hurt,                                          30.
Dee (Frances),                                        41, 43, 57.
  Born,                                                       39.
Dee (Jane), _passim_.
Dee (Dr. John), _passim_.
  Situation of his house at Mortlake,                          2.
  His chemical diary,                                         10.
  Dreams he is dead,                                          17.
  Goes abroad with his family,                                21.
  Returns to England,                                         32.
  Installed warden of Manchester,                             55.
Dee (Madinia),                            33, 34, 38, 39, 48, 56.
Dee (Margaret),                                               56.
  Born,                                                       53.
  Baptised,                                                  _ib._
  Weaned,                                                     55.
Dee (Mary),                                                   25.
Dee (Michael), weaned,                                        21.
  Accidentally wounds his eye,                                25.
  Ill with an ague,                                           27.
  Illness and death,                                          50.
Dee (Nicholas),                                               25.
Dee (Rowland),                                        20, 21, 64.
  Baptised,                                                   18.
  Goes to nurse,                                              19.
  Falls into the Thames,                                      35.
Dee (Theodore), born,                                         26.
  Baptised,                                                  _ib._
  Weaned,                                                     31.
  Accident,                                                   35.
  His eyes sore,                                              48.
  Illness,                                                   _ib._
Denby (Elizabeth),                                            42.
Deny (Anne), born,                                            33.
Deny (Dr.),                                                   10.
Derby (Countess of),                                      55, 59.
Derby (Earl of),                              52, 53, 55, 56, 59.
Dickenson (R.),                                               60.
Digges (Thomas), Lends Dr. Dee some money,                    43.
Diggs (William),                                              39,
Dionysiis (D. de),                                            17.
Dodding (Dr.),                                                39.
Drake (Sir Francis),                                          11.
Ducket (Lady),                                                34.
Ducket (Sir Lionel),                                       6, 20.
Duerend (Mr.),                                                31.
Dumbell (Mr.),                                                64.
Dunstan, Book of,                                             25.
Dutton (Laurence),                                            54.
Dyer (Mr.),                            6, 19, 26, 27, 28, 29, 33.
  Visits Dr. Dee,                                              2.
  Ambassador to Denmark,                                      32.
  Reconciled to Dr. Dee,                                      38.
Dymmock (Mr.),                                                52.

Edmunds (Mr.), Makes acquaintance with him,                   18.
Edward (Roger),                                        4, 38, 61.
Edwards (Edward),                                             54.
Egerton (Lord Francis),                                       35.
  Dr. Dee dines with him,                                     46.
  Gives Mrs. Dee twenty angels,                               47.
  Godfather to Margaret Dee,                                  53.
Elizabeth (Queen),                                            34.
  Interview with Dr. Dee,                                      4.
  Goes to Richmond,                                            5.
  Interview with Dr. Dee,                                    _ib._
  Her disease,                                               _ib._
  Her dwarf,                                                   8.
  Goes to Richmond,                                          _ib._
  Visits Dr. Dee at Mortlake,                                _ib._
  Interview with Dr. Dee,                                      9.
  Removes from Richmond,                                      10.
  Goes to Whitehall,                                          13.
  Dines with Walsingham,                                      18.
  Calls on Dr. Dee,                                           19.
  Goes from Richmond to Greenwich,                            20.
  Dr. Dee kisses her hand,                                   _ib._
  Goes from Greenwich to Sion,                                21.
  Makes Dr. Dee a present of forty angels,                   _ib._
  Interview with Dr. Dee on his return to England,            32.
  Favorably disposed towards Dr. Dee,                         35.
  At Richmond,                                                36.
  Her kindness to Dr. Dee,                                   _ib._
  Discourse with, and liberality to Dr. Dee,                  37.
  Her continued kindness to Dr. Dee,                          39.
  Sends a commission to Dr. Dee’s house at Mortlake,          42.
  Gives him a hundred marks,                                 _ib._
  Receives Dr. Dee’s acknowledgements,                        43.
  Interviews with Dr. Dee and his family,                     49.
  Receives a petition from Mrs. Dee,                          51.
  Appoints Dr. Dee warden of Manchester,                      52.
  Receives Dr. Dee’s Acknowledgements for being appointed
    to the wardenship of Manchester through the
    Countess of Warwick,                                      53.
Ellet (Oliver),                                               61.
Elmeston (John), studies dialling under Dr. Dee,               6.
Embden (Mr.),                                                 32.
Emery (William),                                  33, 44, 54, 59.
  His birth,                                                   2.
  His dishonesty,                                              6.
Essex (the Countess of),                                      53.
Eton (Mr.),                                                   15.
Euclid,                                                       29.
Evans (John),                                                  1.

Faber (Martin),                                               17.
Felde (Elizabeth),                                50, 51, 53, 54.
Fennar (William), birth,                                       1.
Ferdinand (Mr.),                                              40.
Fisher (Mr.),                                                 33.
Fitton (Sir Edward),                                          58.
Fletcher (John),                                              60.
Fletcher (Walter),                                            61.
Fletewood (Sergeant),                                         44.
Flower (Mr.), visits Dr. Dee,                                  5.
Fosker (Mr.), visits Dr. Dee,                                  8.
Fowler (William),                                             34.
Frank (Anne), possessed by a spirit,                          35.
  Anointed by Dr. Dee,                                       _ib._
  Attempts suicide,                                          _ib._
  Commits suicide,                                            36.
Franken (Christian), recants his work against Christ,         23.
  His work against Christ exhibited by Dr. Dee before
    the Archbishop of Canterbury,                             42.
Franklin (Mrs.),                                              16.
Fromonds (Elizabeth), visits Dr. Dee,                          4.
Fromonds (Jane), birth,                                        1.
  Marries Dr. Dee,                                             4.
  Goes to Richmond,                                            5.
Fromonds (Mr.), visited by Dr. Dee,                            4.
  Death,                                                       6.
Fromonds (Nicholas),                              32, 33, 39, 40.
Fuller (Mr.),                                                 52.

Gaele (Jane),                                               5, 8.
  Supernatural fire in her chamber,                            7.
Gardner (Robert),                                             16.
  Enters the service of Dr. Dee,                              13.
  His philosophical secret,                                   15.
Garland (Edward), visits Dr. Dee at Trebona,                  22.
Garland (Henry),                                              30.
Garland (Francis),                        22, 23, 24, 26, 28, 29,
                                          31, 33, 35, 44, 48, 51.
Garland (Robert),                                             26.
Garret (Nurse),                                   12, 14, 15, 16.
Gele, _v._ Gaele.
Geoffry of Monmouth,                                           4.
George (Sir Thomas),                                          42.
Gerard (John), _the celebrated herbalist_,                16, 50.
Gerard (Mr.),                                                 63.
Gerard (Mr.),                                                 55.
Giffard (Dr.),                                                40.
Gilbert (Adrian),                                          7, 33.
  Is reconciled to Dr. Dee,                                    6.
  Conference with Dr. Dee about the North West voyage,    18, 19.
  Goes to Chelsea,                                            19.
  Goes to Brentford and Devonshire,                           20.
  Transactions with Dr. Dee,                                  32.
Gilbert (Sir Humphry),                                         4.
  Dr. Dee’s dealing with him for his grant of discovery,       8.
  Grants Dr. Dee’s request,                                  _ib._
Gilbert (Sir John),                                            8.
Glotz (Hans of),                                              31.
Glotz (John of),                                          31, 32.
Godolphin (G.),                                               10.
Golding (Arthur),                                             60.
Goodyer (Thomas),                                     53, 55, 61.
Goodwyn (Mary),                                               56.
Goose (Winifred),                                         32, 43.
  Birth,                                                       2.
  “Evilly tempted,”                                           40.
Gore (F.),                                                    25.
Grant (Mr.),                                                  40.
Gray (Mr.), his attack on professors of alchemy,              47.
Grey (Lord),                                                  18.
Griffith (Thomas),                                    27, 37, 57.
Gubbens (Mr.),                                                46.
Gwyn (John),                                                  57.

Hackluyt (Mr.),                                            4, 34.
Halifax,                                                      56.
Haller (John Leonard),                                        11.
  Visits Dr. Dee,                                     17 (_bis_).
  Goes to Scotland,                                           18.
Halton (John),                                                21.
Hammond (John),                                           28, 31.
Hankinson (Thomas),                                           22.
  Comes to Mortlake,                                          34.
Hanward (John),                                               32.
Harding (Mr.),                                                49.
Hardy (John),                                                 61.
Harmer (Mr.),                                                 63.
Harper (Mr.),                                                 32.
Harriot (Thomas),                                             41.
Harrughby (Mr.),                                              61.
Hart (Mr.), _English Minister at Stade_, visits Dr. Dee,      31.
Harward (Thomas),                                             49.
Hatton (Sir Christopher),                                      5.
  Audience with Dr. Dee,                                       4.
  Knighted,                                                  _ib._
Hatton (Randal),                                              14.
Haut (Nicholas du),                                           22.
Hawghton (Mr.),                                               55.
Hawkins (Mr.),                                            11, 45.
Haylok (Mr.),                                                 12.
Haywood (Sir Rowland),                                         4.
Hazelwood (Catharine),                                        52.
Hazelwood (Marmion),                                      51, 52.
Hazelwood (William), birth,                                   31.
Hearne (Thomas),                                          19, 37.
Hendor (Captain), makes acquaintance with Dr. Dee,            49.
Henedge (Sir Thomas),                                         51.
Henrick (Mr.),                                            12, 13.
Herbert (John),                6, 17, 18, 36, 38, 45, 46, 52, 53.
Herbert (Mary),                                               14.
Herbert (Mrs.),                                           14, 42.
Herbert (William),                                10, 13, 14, 64.
  His annotations on Dr. Dee’s _Monas Hieroglyphica_,          3.
Heriot (Mr.),                                             41, 48.
Hertford (the Countess of), birth,                             4.
  Her gift to Frances Dee,                                    57.
Hesketh (Richard),                                            12.
Hess (Dr. Andrew),                                            12.
Hesse (the Landgrave of),                                     31.
Hetherley (William),                                          53.
Heton (Matthew),                                          57, 60.
Heydon (Mr.), birth                                            1.
Hickman (Ambrose),                                            39.
Hickman (Bartholomew),             5, 13, 37, 38, 39, 41, 44, 45,
                                  46, 48, 50, 51, 52, 53, 55, 57,
                                          58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 64.
  His birth,                                                   1.
  His papers destroyed by Dr. Dee,                            63.
Hickman (Jane),                                           38, 50.
Hickman (Richard),                                             5.
Hickman (William),                                            48.
Hill (Auditor),                                               41.
Hilton (Edmund),              24, 27, 29, 30, 31, 32, 34, 35, 54.
Hilton (John),                                                 3.
Hilton (Robert),                                       6, 13, 21.
Hinde (Mr.),                                                  11.
Hipwell (Mr.),                                                52.
Hitchcock (Mr.),                                               5.
Hodges (Owen),                                                64.
Holcroft (Mr.),                                               64.
Holden (Ralph),                                       55, 56, 60.
Holland (Adam),                                           63, 64.
Holland (Miles),                                          46, 47.
Holland (Richard),                                            62.
Hollinshed (Ralph),                                           62.
Holtens (Mr.),                                                17.
Homes (Mr.),                                                  46.
Hone (Dr.),                                                   54.
Hook (Thomas),                                                21.
Hooper (Walter),                                               3.
Hopwood (Edward),                                         57, 59.
Hudson (Thomas),                                      11, 34, 38.
  Birth,                                                       2.
  Conference about the North-West passage,                    19.
Hulme (Mr.),                                                  58.
Huyck (Dr.),                                                   2.
Hynde (Edward),                                            3, 14.

Ingram (Mr.),                                                 17.
Ive (Mr.),                                                    14.

Jack (Thomas),                                        32, 33, 34.
Jackesbite (Robin),                                           16.
Jones (Morgan),                                               52.
Jones (Thomas),                                    7, 36, 37, 56.
Jones (Sir Thomas),                                           38.
Jonson (Mr.),                                                 51.
Julius (Dr.),                                                 60.

Kay (Roger),                                              56, 59.
Kelly (Edward),                       32, 33, 48, 50, 51, 52, 53.
  Birth,                                                       1.
  His sister,                                                _ib._
  An apothecary in Worcester,                                _ib._
  Goes to Blakley,                                            17.
  Goes to London,                                             20.
  Goes abroad,                                                21.
  Dr. Dee is sent to him,                                    _ib._
  Stops three weeks at Prague,                               _ib._
  Makes gold,                                                 22.
  Goes to Prague and Trebona,                                _ib._
  Quarrel and reconciliation with Dr. Dee,                    23.
  Goes to Prague,                                             24.
  To Trebona,                                                _ib._
  Dispute with Dr. Dee,                                      _ib._
  Accident with his spirit-lamp,                              25.
  Invites Dr. Dee to his house,                              _ib._
  Goes to Crumlow,                                           _ib._
  Distils sericon,                                            26.
  Informs Dr. Dee of treacherous friends,                    _ib._
  Reveals a great secret to Dr. Dee,                          27.
  Falls ill with an ague,                                    _ib._
  Goes to Prague,                                             29.
  Returns thence,                                            _ib._
  Dr. Dee gives his glass to him,                            _ib._
  Gives Dr. Dee’s glass to Lord Rosenberg,                    30.
  His bad conduct to Dr. Dee,                                 34.
  His work on alchemy,                                        35.
  Dreamt of by Dr. Dee,                                       44.
  Set at liberty by the emperor,                          46, 47.
  His death,                                                  54.
Kelly (Lydia),                                            21, 28.
  Birth,                                                       2.
  Goes abroad,                                                21.
  Gives birth to a still-born child,                          26.
  Is written to by Dr. Dee in a friendly manner,              27.
  Goes to Punchartz,                                          29.
  Gives birth to twins still-born,                            30.
  Goes to England,                                            31.
Kelly (Thomas),                           25, 32, 33, 34, 44, 50.
  Birth,                                                       2.
  Marriage,                                                   23.
  Goes to Prague,                                             24.
Kemp (Randall),                                           41, 62.
Kenion (George),                                          49, 61.
Kent (Countess of),                                           51.
  Visits Dr. Dee,                                             47.
Key (Richard),                                                57.
Khanradt (Dr. Kenrich),                                       31.
Killegrew (Sir John),                                         17.
King (Mr.),                                                   12.
Knaresborough (Bartholomew),                                  16.
Knaresborough (Thomas),                                       45.
Kooke (Roger), _v._ Cooke.
Kyffin (Morrice),                                     10, 15, 48.
Kylmer (George), makes acquaintance with Dr. Dee,             13.
Kyrton (Elizabeth),                                       11, 46.
Laen (Van der),                                           47, 48.
Lagney (Sir Richard),                                         33.
Laiesley (Mr.),                                               42.
Laigham (Bishop of),                                          42.
  His quarrel with Dr. Dee,                                   43.
Langley (Mr.),                                                63.
Larder (Mr.),                                                 11.
Laward (Mr.),                                             44, 51.
Laward (Thomas),                                          51, 52.
Lawrence (John),                                      48, 59, 61.
Lee (Mr.), _schoolmaster at Mortlake_,                16, 33, 35.
  Makes acquaintance with Dr. Dee,                            18.
Lee (Mrs.),                                                   46.
Legg (Dorothy),                                               47.
Legh (Charles),                                   55, 57, 62, 64.
Legh (Richard),                                               64.
Legh (Robert),                                                62.
Legh (Sir Urien),                                             58.
Leicester (The Earl of),                                      20.
  Visits Dr. Dee,                                              2.
  Sends Dr. Dee abroad,                                        5.
  Intercedes with the Queen for Dr. Dee,                      21.
Leon (Mr.),                                                   56.
Lewknor (Mary), birth,                                         1.
Lewys (John),                                          5, 16, 17.
Lewys (Dr.),                                                   6.
Lewys, the proctor,                                           36.
Lilly (John),                                                 32.
Lincoln (Bishop of),                                          58.
Littlechild (John),                                           14.
Lloyd (Oliver),                                           21, 53.
Lock (Benjamin),                                           8, 17.
Lock (Mr.),                                                8, 54.
Lock (Zachariah),                                              8.
London (Bishop of),                                        9, 34.
Lording (Mr.),                                                47.
Losin (George),                                               31.
Lurensey (Mr.),                                               42.
Lydgatt (Nurse),                                      19, 21, 54.
Lyne (Ellen),                                                  3.
  Death,                                                       5.

Mains (Mr.),                                                  30.
Mallett (Walter),                                             50.
Martyn (Richard),                                             47.
Maspely (Nurse),                                              12.
Mather (Dr.), _Bishop of Bristol_,                            37.
Mathias (Zacharias),                                          30.
Maynard (Edward),                                             39.
Maynard (Henry), birth,                                       28.
  Death,                                                      43.
Maynard (Robert),                                     37, 40, 43.
Maynard (William), birth,                                     21.
Memschit (James),                                             22.
Meulen (D. V.), birth,                                         1.
Middleton (Mr.), _Bishop of St. David’s_, visits Dr. Dee,     18.
Mills (Mr.),                                                  20.
Molyneux (Lady),                                              55.
Molyneux (Sir ----),                                          55.
Monteagle (Lord),                                             16.
Morgan (Mr.),                                                 40.
Morley (Lord),                                                16.
Morryce (John),                                               57.
Moscovy (Emperor of),                                         22.
Mountjoy (Lord),                                              45.
Mownson (Elizabeth), birth,                                    2.
Mownson (Thomas),                                             39.
  His sister,                                                  2.
  Birth,                                                     _ib._
Multon (Daniel van der), visits Dr. Dee,                      31.
Murphyn (Vincent), slanders Dr. Dee,                   3 (_bis_).
  His law-suit against Dr. Dee,                                9.
  Loses his cause,                                            10.
  Judgment given against him,                                _ib._
  Released,                                                  _ib._
Myniver (Dr.),                                                16.

Nant (Lieutenant),                                            44.
Nettlebronner (Conrad),                                       35.
Nevell (Mary),                                        40, 53, 61.
  Birth,                                                       1.
Newbury (Mr.),                                                17.
Newsam (Bartholomew), lends money to Dr. Dee,                  3.
Newton (Mr.),                                                 62.
Nichols (Francis),                    44, 47, 49, 57, 61, 62, 63.
  Dispute between him and Dr. Dee,                            48.
Nichols (Mary),                                           62, 63.
Nichols (William),                                            63.
Nicholson (William),                                      55, 61.
Nores (Mr.),                                                  47.
North (Mr.), comes from Poland,                               19.
  Brings salutations to Dr. Dee and Queen Elizabeth,         _ib_.
Norton (John),                                                54.
Nutthall (Francis),                                           56.

Oliver (Thomas), makes acquaintance with Dr. Dee,             39.
Osborn (Mr.),                                                 17.
Osmond (the Earl of),                                         17.
Ottomeen (Mr.), makes acquaintance with Dr. Dee,              18.
Owen (Mr.),                                                   14.

Packington (Mr.),                                             11.
Paget (Mr.),                                                  55.
Palmer (Matthew),                                 57, 58, 59, 60.
Parpoynt _v_. Perpoynt.
Parry (Mrs. Blanche),                                          6.
Partrich (Mr.),                                               52.
Peckham (Sir George),                                         17.
  Conference with Dr. Dee,                                    16.
Peiser (Dr. Michael), visits Dr. Dee,                         47.
Peregrinus (David),                                           26.
Peregrinus (Peter),                                           26.
Perkins (Mr.),                                                31.
Perpoynt (Magdalen),                                      46, 49.
Perpoynt (Mark),                                          44, 46.
  His house purchased by Dr. Dee,                             45.
Perrot (Sir John), executed,                                  40.
Pezelia (Dr.),                                                57.
Phillips (Mr.),                                               16.
Plan (Mrs.),                                                  46.
Plat (Mr.),                                                   17.
Pole (William),                                               16.
Ponsoys, or Pontoys (John),                   41, 46, 47, 59, 61.
  Birth,                                                       2.
Powell (Mr.), _the younger_,
    makes acquaintance with Dr. Dee,                          18.
Powell (Anne),                                                52.
Prise (Harry),                                                47.
  His dreams,                                                 10.
Prychard (Mr.),                                               36.
Pucci (Francis),                                              23.
  His dealings with Edward Kelly,                         26, 27.

Radford (Mr.),                                                19.
Randolph II.,                                                 29.
Ratclyf (John),                                       59, 60, 63.
Raleigh (Walter), _afterwards knighted_,                      20.
  Letter to Dr. Dee,                                          21.
  Dr. Dee dines with him,                                     54.
Raynolds (Mr.),                                                4.
Redhed (Mrs.),                                                46.
Redishmer,                                                    62.
Reimer (Joachim),                                             30.
Reinhold (Dr. Victor),                                21, 22, 27.
Revel (Mary),                                                 47.
Richardson (Thomas),                          44, 47, 48, 49, 50.
Ripley (The Canon),                                           26.
Rogers (Daniel),                                               4.
Rogers (William), commits suicide,                             3.
Rolls (Edward),                                               29.
Rosenbergh (Lady),                                            29.
Rosenbergh (Lord),                                22, 23, 24, 29.
  Gives Dr. Dee’s glass to the emperor,                       30.
Rowland (Arthur),                                         56, 62.
Rowland (Nurse),                                      20 (_bis_).
Rowlaschy,                                                    25.
Rowley (Edward),                                      28, 29, 51.
Russell (Lady),                                               48.
  Robbed of her jewels,                                       39.
Russell (Lord),                                               20.
Russell (Margaret), _Countess of Cumberland_. Birth,           1.
Ryve (Antony),                                                60.

Sagiensis (Radolphus), _a chemist_,                           30.
Sankinson (Thomas),                                           58.
Saunders (Mr.),                                               39.
Saville (Henry),                                              56.
  Makes acquaintance with Dr. Dee,                            18.
  Visits Dr. Dee,                                             55.
Sawl (Barnabas),                                          14, 16.
  Troubled with a spirit,                                     13.
  Speaks ill of Dr. Dee,                                      15.
Sawl (Edward),                                                14.
Saxton (Christopher),                                         55.
  Surveys Manchester,                                         56.
Schwiczenbagh (The Earl of),                                  30.
Scotland (The Bishop of),                                     37.
Selbury (Mr.),                                                 2.
Shallcross (James),                                       58, 60.
Sharp (Thomas),                                           48, 50.
Sherington (Mr.),                                             55.
Sidney (Sir Philip),                                          20.
  Visits Dr. Dee,                                              2.
Simkinson (Thomas),                                           30.
Simon (Alexander), visits Dr. Dee,                             3.
Simons (Phillip),                                             16.
Skullthorp (Mr.),                                             14.
Skydmor (Lady),                                               51.
Skydmor (Mary),                                               11.
Skydmor (Mr.),                                                 7.
Smyth (Gawayne),                                          32, 35.
Smyth (Hugh),                                                 11.
Smyth (John),                                                 39.
Smyth (Mr.),                                                  61.
Smith (Thomas),                                               40.
Sombius,                                                      42.
Southwell (Thomas),                                           32.
  Visits Dr. Dee at Trebona,                                  28.
  Tries to reconcile Dr. Dee and Kelly,                      _ib_.
  Possesses a lump of the philosopher’s stone,               _ib_.
Spenser (John), visits Dr. Dee,                               33.
Stafford (Mrs.), arrests Dr. Dee,                             16.
Stale (Mr.),                                                  28.
Standysh (Mr.),                                               58.
Stanley (Sir William),                                        31.
Statfeldt (John),                                             53.
Statfeldt (Timothy),                                          53.
Sted (Charles),                                       17, 54, 61.
Stephen (Robert),                                             57.
Steward (Simeon), birth,                                       2.
Stockden (John),                                  34, 45, 46, 49.
Stockden (Mrs.),                                          36, 50.
Stoner (Mr.),                                                  8.
Stoner (Mr.), birth,                                          35.
Strange (Andrew),                                             38.
Stubble (Margery),                                            53.
Stubble (Nurse),                                          54, 56.
Stubley (John),                                               56.
Sussex (The Earl of), his quarrel with
    the Earl of Leicester,                                    12.
Suttley (Thomas),                                             10.
Swallow (Samuel), birth,                                       2.
Swyft (Mr.),                                                  28.
Talbot (Mr.),                                             15, 16.
Talsley (Robert),                                             58.
Tattin (Rolous),                                              31.
Tavistock (The Earl of),                                      16.
Taylor (Antony Ryve),                                         50.
Taylor (John),                                                59.
Taylor (Mr.),                                                  5.
Taylor (Ralph),                                               59.
Thaneth (Robert),                                     40, 41, 44.
Theneth, _v_. Thaneth.
Thickpenny (Robert),                                          47.
Thomas (Robert),                                              50.
Thornton (Margery),                                       46, 47.
Thurp (Mr.),                                                  58.
Thynne (Mr.),                                                 61.
Tomasin (Mrs.), the Queen’s dwarf,                             8.
Tomson (Mr.),                                                 45.
Townson (Mr.), conference with Dr. Dee concerning
    the North-west passage,                                   19.
Traherne (Morgan),                                        48, 53.
Traves (James),                                               56.
Treherne, _v_. Traherne.
Turnifer (Mr.),                                                5.
Twyne (Mrs.),                                                 46.
Tyldesley (Mr.),                                              56.
Tyndale (Mrs.),                                           37, 38.

Walder (Mr.),                                                 59.
Walkedine (Richard),                          42, 54, 58, 60, 61.
Walker (William),                                             46.
Walkson (Richard),                                            60.
Walls (Mrs.),                                                 52.
Walmesley, Mr. Sergeant,                                      14.
Walsingham, Sir Francis,                               6, 31, 32.
  Conference with Dr. Dee,                                     4.
  Sends Dr. Dee abroad,                                        5.
  Conference with Dr. Dee about the
    North-west passage,                               18 (_bis_).
  Queen Elizabeth dines with him,                             18.
  Calls on Dr. Dee,                                           19.
  His death,                                                  33.
Walsingham (Lady),                                            33.
  Calls on Dr. Dee,                                           19.
Ward (Richard),                                               52.
Warren (Mr.),                                             41, 52.
Warwick (Countess of),                        40, 42, 43, 49, 53.
Waters (Henry),                                               12.
Webb (Robert),                    38, 39, 41, 44, 46, 47, 49, 50.
Webbes (Adolphus),                                    40, 44, 48.
  Committed to prison,                                        47.
Webber (Thomas),                                              44.
Welder (Robert),                                          45, 46.
Welder (Mrs.),                                                38.
Welsham (Robert),                                             57.
Werall (Mr.),                                                 59.
Western (Richard),                                            54.
White (Richard),                                           8, 49.
Whitlock (Edward),                                            28.
Wier (Mr.),                                                   57.
Wilks (Sir Thomas),                                           48.
Willemots (Master),                                           52.
Williams (Mr.),                                                8.
Williamson (Thomas),                                      58, 62.
Willoughby (Lord),                                            51.
  Birth,                                                       1.
  Dines with Dr. Dee,                                         47.
  Makes him a present,                                       _ib_.
Withenstalls (Mr.),                                           62.
Witischindi (D.),                                             32.
Wodcote (Francis),                                            57.
Wolly (Sir John),                                         49, 51.
Wolly (Mr.),                                                  42.
Wood (Robert),                                            48, 53.
Wortley (Mr.),                                            58, 63.
Wye (Thomas),                                                 49.
Wykham (Mr.),                                                 13.
Wyse (Harry),                                                 40.

Xyd,                                                          55.

Yardely (Mr.),                                                59.
Yong (Mr.),                               17, 26, 29, 31, 32, 34.
  Conference with Dr. Dee about the North-West passage,       19.

Zacharias, the Book of,                                       25.
Zackinson (Mr.), visits Dr. Dee,                               8.


  FINIS.




London: J. B. Nichols and Son, Printers, 25, Parliament-Street.




  [Illustration: Camden Society logo]

                CAMDEN SOCIETY.

             For the Publication of

     Early Historical and Literary Remains.


At a General Meeting of the Camden Society held at the Freemasons’
Tavern, Great Queen Street, Lincoln’s Inn Fields, on Monday the
2nd May, 1842,

  THOMAS AMYOT, Esq. F.R.S., Treas. S.A., Director,
    in the chair.

The Director having opened the business of the Meeting,

The Secretary read the Report of the Council agreed upon at their
meeting of the 28th April last, whereupon it was

Resolved, That the said Report be received and printed, and that the
Thanks of the Society be given to the Council for their services.

The Thanks of the Society were also voted to the Editors of the
Society’s publications; to the Right Honourable Thomas Grenville; to the
Master and Fellows of St. Peter’s College, Cambridge; to J. I.
Blackburn, Esq. M.P.; to the Local Secretaries; and to Messrs. Nichols,
for the assistance towards attaining the objects of the Society
mentioned in the Report as having been given by them.

The Secretary then read the Report of the Auditors, agreed upon at their
meeting of the 30th of April last, whereupon it was

Resolved, That the said Report be received and approved, and that the
Thanks of the Society be given to the Auditors for their trouble.

Thanks were then voted to the Director, Treasurer, and Secretary for
their services during the past year; and

The Meeting then proceeded to the election of Officers, when

The Right Hon. Lord FRANCIS EGERTON, M.P. was elected President, and

  THOMAS AMYOT, Esq. F.R.S. Treas. S.A.
  The Right Hon. Lord BRAYBROOKE.
  JOHN BRUCE, Esq. F.S.A.
  JOHN PAYNE COLLIER, Esq. F.S.A.
  CHARLES PURTON COOPER, Esq. Q.C. D.C.L. F.R.S. F.S.A.
  T. CROFTON CROKER, Esq. F.S.A. M.R.I.A.
  SIR HENRY ELLIS, K.H. F.R.S. SEC. S.A.
  JAMES ORCHARD HALLIWELL, Esq. F.R.S., F.S.A.
  The Rev. JOSEPH HUNTER, F.S.A.
  Sir FREDERIC MADDEN, K.H., F.R.S., F.S.A.
  JOHN HERMAN MERIVALE, ESQ. F.S.A.
  THE REV. LANCELOT SHARPE, M.A., F.S.A.
  THOMAS STAPLETON, Esq. F.S.A.
  WILLIAM JOHN THOMS, Esq. F.S.A. AND
  THOMAS WRIGHT, Esq. M.A., F.S.A.

were elected as the Council, and

  JOHN YONGE AKERMAN, Esq. F.S.A.
  CHARLES FREDERICK BARNWELL, Esq. F.R.S., F.S.A., and
  PETER CUNNINGHAM, Esq.

were elected Auditors of the Society for the ensuing year.

Thanks were then voted to the Director, for his able conduct in the
Chair.


ELECTION OF OFFICERS, 1842.

At a Meeting of the Council of the Camden Society held at No. 25,
Parliament Street, Westminster, on Thursday the 5th May, 1842,

  THOMAS AMYOT, Esq. in the Chair;

The Council having proceeded to the Election of Officers,--

  THOMAS AMYOT, Esq. was elected Director; JOHN BRUCE, Esq. Treasurer;
  and WILLIAM J. THOMS, Esq. Secretary, for the Year next ensuing.


REPORT OF THE COUNCIL.

Dated 1st May, 1842.

The Council elected on the 3rd May 1841 are pleased to be able to report
that the affairs of the Society continue in a condition of unabated
prosperity.

The number of 1200 Members, to which the Society is limited, has been
maintained; and there continues to be a large number of Candidates for
admission upon vacancies.

The investment standing in the names of the Trustees for the Society has
been increased, since the last General Meeting, from the sum of £408
0_s._ 4_d._, Three per Cent. consols, to £574 13_s._ 8_d._ This increase
has arisen from the investment of sums received for Compositions; and
the Council recommend that whatever sum may now be in hand on that
account, should be added to the investment.

The Council have added the following gentlemen to the list of Local
Secretaries:--

  The Rev. Joseph Bosworth, LL.D. for Nottingham.

  Richard Rees, Esq. F.S.A. for Cardiff, in the place of
    Captain W. H. Smyth, retired.

  James Heywood Markland, Esq. F.R.S. F.S.A. for Bath,
    in the place of Rev. William L. Nichols, who has removed.

The Publications for the past year have been--

  The Second Book of the Travels of Nicander Nucius, a Corcyræan
  Gentleman who came to England in the suite of an Ambassador from the
  Netherlands, sent by the Emperor Charles V. to the Court of Henry
  VIII.: translated from the Original Greek MS. formerly belonging to
  Archbishop Laud, and now preserved in the Bodleian Library. Edited by
  the Rev. JOHN ANTONY CRAMER, D.D. Principal of New Inn Hall, and
  Public Orator, Oxford.

  The Latin Poetry of Walter Mapes, Archdeacon of Oxford at the
  beginning of the thirteenth century. Edited by THOMAS WRIGHT, Esq.
  M.A., F.S.A. and

  Three inedited Early English Metrical Romances. Edited, from a MS.
  in the possession of J. I. Blackburn, Esq. M.P., by JOHN ROBSON, Esq.

And--

  The Private Diary of Dr. John Dee, from the MS. in the Ashmolean
  Library, together with a Catalogue of MSS. in his Library. Edited by
  JAMES ORCHARD HALLIWELL, Esq. F.R.S., F.S.A.

is completed at the press, and will be ready for delivery to the Members
by the end of the present month. The Council have followed the precedent
of former years, in directing that there should be appended to the
last-mentioned volume a list of the Members of the Society for the past
year; and, if the General Meeting think proper, this Report and that of
the Auditors may also be added.

The Council have much satisfaction in being able to state that the
“Apology for the Lollards,” a work attributed to Wickliffe, which has
been so long delayed by reason of the many engagements of the Editor,
the Rev. Jas. Henthorn Todd, D.D. is now on the eve of completion; and
will certainly be ready for delivery in the ensuing year.

Considerable progress has also been made with the “Promptorium,” a Latin
and English Dictionary of words in use during the fifteenth century,
editing by Albert Way, Esq. F.S.A. a work which the Council believe will
be one of great merit and utility; and a portion of it will be one of
the publications of the ensuing year.

Besides the Apology for the Lollards and the Promptuary, the following
works have been ordered to be put to press at the convenience of their
Editors and the Society, and will be published as soon as they are
ready.

  A Collection of Original Letters and Papers of Literary Men of
  England during the Reigns of Elizabeth and James I., including some
  Unpublished Papers of Camden. To be edited by SIR HENRY ELLIS, K.H.,
  F.R.S., F.S.A.

  Latin Romance Narratives and Legends of the thirteenth, fourteenth,
  and fifteenth Centuries, relating to King Arthur and other Heroes of
  the Welsh and Breton cycle of Fiction. To be edited by Sir FREDERIC
  MADDEN, K.H., F.R.S., F.S.A.

  Letters and State Papers relating to the Proceedings of the Earl of
  Leicester in the Low Countries, in the years 1585 and 1586, derived
  from a MS. placed at the disposal of the Society by Frederick Ouvry,
  Esq. and other sources. To be edited by JOHN BRUCE, Esq. F.S.A.

  The Private Diary of Thomas Cartwright, Bishop of Chester, temp.
  James II.

  The Romance of Jean and Blonde of Oxford, by Philippe de Reims, an
  Anglo-Norman Poet, of the latter end of the twelfth Century. To be
  edited from a Unique MS. in the Royal Library at Paris, by M. LE ROUX
  DE LINCY, editor of the Roman de Brut.

The Council have added the following works to the list of Suggested
Publications--

  A Collection of Original Letters relating to the Dissolution of the
  Monasteries and some other points connected with the Reformation.
  To be edited by THOMAS WRIGHT, Esq. M.A., F.S.A.

  Specimens of the Anglo-Latin Poets from the seventh to the thirteenth
  century, selected from inedited MSS. and arranged chronologically,
  with notices of the Writers and popular Notes. To be edited by THOMAS
  WRIGHT, Esq. M.A., F.S.A.

  Contemporary Diary of a resident in London, extending from the Year
  1550 to 1563, now the Cottonian MS. Vitellius F. v. To be edited by
  JOHN GOUGH NICHOLS, Esq. F.S.A.

The Council have to direct the attention of the Society to the
obligations conferred upon it by J. I. Blackburne, Esq. M.P. by giving
the Society the use of the MS. of the Three Romances, edited by Mr.
Robson.

Also by the Right Hon. Thomas Grenville, in placing in Mr. Way’s hands,
upon the application of the Director, his valuable early printed
editions of the “Promptorium,” which Mr. Way wished to use for his
edition of that work; and by the Master and Fellows of Saint Peter’s
College, Cambridge, for the readiness with which, upon a similar
application, they lent the Council, for the use of Mr. Way, a valuable
MS., entitled Campus Florum.

The same exertions, in behalf of the Society, which former Councils have
acknowledged, have been continued to be made by the Local Secretaries,
and other friends of the Society resident in the country; and the
Council trust that such exertions will not be relaxed. To diffuse a
knowledge of the existence and objects of the Society tends, not merely
to promote its welfare, but also to carry out the purpose for which it
was established, by directing the attention of the possessors of MSS. to
those collections in which there yet exist, unpublished, inestimable
papers which this Society would be ready and willing to make available.

Messrs. Nichols have continued to the Council the same attentions, and
have rendered them the same valuable and gratuitous assistance in the
general management of the affairs of the Society, which they have given
from its Institution. Nothing can be more honourable to Messrs. Nichols,
or more advantageous to the Society; and the Council are assured, that
it is only necessary for them to state the fact to the Members, in order
to its being duly appreciated.

The Council have to regret the loss, by death, during the last year, of
the Rt. Hon. THOS. P. COURTENAY, who, in addition to valuable services
as a Member of the Council, was one of the Trustees of the Society, and
gave much attention to its affairs. The Council have filled up the
vacancy in the Trusteeship by electing to that office CHARLES PURTON
COOPER, Esq. LL.D., Q.C., F.R.S., F.S.A.

The Council have also to regret the death of HENRY BOWER, Esq. F.S.A.
the very zealous and efficient Local Secretary of the Society at
Doncaster; and also of the following other Members:

  THOMAS BARNES, Esq.
  GEORGE FREDERICK BELTZ, Esq. F.S.A. Lancaster Herald.
  HENRY EYTON, Esq.
  The Rev. THOMAS DUDLEY FOSBROKE, F.S.A.
  F. T. GRAYLING, Esq.
  Lieut.-Col. JOHN HARVEY.
  JOHN HOLMES, Esq. F.S.A. East Retford.
  THEODORE EDWARD HOOK, Esq. F.S.A.
  HENRY MITCHISON, Esq.
  JOHN MOORE, Esq. F.S.A.
  The Right Hon. the Earl of MUNSTER, F.R.S., Pr.As.S.
  The Rev. GEORGE FREDERICK NOTT, D.D., F.S.A.
  EDWARD SKEGG, Esq. F.R.G.S.
  JOHN SYDNEY TAYLOR, Esq.
  Lieut.-Gen. WILLIAM THORNTON.
  HENRY WOODTHORPE, Esq. F.S.A.

The Council report that the Treasurer, having found that other
engagements prevented his any longer devoting to the accounts and
financial correspondence of the Society the time and attention which,
after an experience of three years, he found to be absolutely necessary
to be given to them, submitted to the Council the propriety of their
accepting his resignation, or of making some other arrangement with
respect to the accounts. The Council, regarding the subject as one
vitally affecting the welfare of the Society, proceeded immediately to
take it into their consideration, and are happy to be able to report
that they have effected an arrangement by which the accounts are now
kept, and the financial correspondence is attended to, by the Secretary,
the Treasurer still continuing responsible to the Society. This
arrangement will put the Society to a small annual expense, which can
very well be afforded, and which the Council are persuaded the Members
will think well bestowed, if it has the effect of preserving accuracy in
the accounts. The recent arrangements in the Post Office render it easy
for country Members to transmit their subscriptions by Post Office
orders, which course the Council recommend to be adopted, making the
Post Office orders payable to the Treasurer.

After the lapse of four years of continuing prosperity the Council hope
that the Camden Society may be regarded as having taken a permanent
station amongst established publishing associations. Many societies have
been founded upon similar principles, and one considerably out-numbers
this Society in Members: but there is no one which can produce better
evidences of stability and prosperity, or which has greater reason to be
satisfied with the estimation in which its works are regarded by the
public. Amongst the Candidates for admission recently entered there are
many Public Libraries and other bodies, whose desire to participate in
the advantages of Membership indicates the reputation of the Society,
both in this and other countries; and the prices maintained by our books
when copies get abroad into the market, afford encouraging proof of the
demand for them on the part of collectors and literary men. In four
years the Society has issued eighteen volumes, all of them works
excluded from the ordinary mode of publication, and yet worthy of being
published, of eminent use to historical inquirers, and likely to retain
a place in the permanent literature of the country.

The forthcoming works are fully calculated to maintain, if not to
increase, the reputation of the Society, and the Council see no reason
to doubt but that the Society may long usefully and prosperously retain
its station, and the number of its Members.


REPORT OF THE AUDITORS,

Dated 30th April, 1842.

We, the Auditors appointed to audit the Accounts of the Camden Society,
report to the Society, that the Treasurer has exhibited to us his
accounts, from the 27th day of April, 1841, to the 30th day of April,
1842, and that we have examined the same, together with the vouchers
relating thereto, and find the same to be correct and satisfactory.

And we further report that the following is a correct Abstract of the
Receipts and Expenditure of the Society during the period to which we
have referred.

  [Transcriber’s Note:

  The following Abstract was originally printed in two columns. The
  headings “Receipts” and “Expenditure” have been added for clarity.]

An ABSTRACT of the RECEIPTS and EXPENDITURE of THE CAMDEN SOCIETY, from
the 27th April, 1841, to the 30th April, 1842.

_Receipts_
                                                              £. s. d.

  Balance of last year’s account                             393 12  2
    [Sidenote: 1841, April 27th, to 1842, April 30th.]
  Received on account of Subscriptions of members in arrear   68  0  0
  The like on account of Subscriptions due 1st May, 1841     956  0  0
  Two half-year’s dividends on £574. 13_s._ 8_d._
    3 per cent. consols, standing in the names of the
    Trustees for the Society                                  17  4  8
  Compositions received from six members                      60  0  0

  Total receipts for the year                             £1,494 16 10

_Expenditure_

  Paid for the purchase of £166. 13_s._ 4_d._ 3 per cent.
    consols, invested for the benefit of the Society        150  0  0
  Paid for printing and paper of 1,250 copies of
    “The Irish Narratives”                                   96 12  6
  The like of “Walter Mapes”                                277 15  0
  The like of “Nicander Nucius”                              98 11  9
  The like of “Metrical Romances”                           109 12  0
  Paid for binding copies of the past year’s books,
    not before charged                                        3  6  0
  The like for binding 1,200 copies of
    “The Irish Narratives”                                   48  0  0
  The like for binding 1,200 copies of each of
    the three books published for this year                 153 12  0
  Paid for delivery and transmission of 1,200 copies
    of the “Irish Narratives,” and of each of the
    three works for the present year--at 2d. per book,
    with paper for wrappers, expense of parcels, &c.         36 16  6
  Paid for lithographic fac-simile, and
    printing paper for the same                               5  4  0
  Paid for transcripts and other expenses of a like kind,
    connected with works published and in progress           40 10 10
  Paid for printing Reports, Lists of Members,
    Prospectuses, Circulars and other miscellaneous
    printing                                                 32  5  0
  Paid expenses of last general meeting                       2 13  0
  One quarter of a year’s payment for keeping the
    Accounts and General Correspondence of the Society       13  2  6
  Paid for stationery, postage, and various
    petty cash expenses                                      15  3  9
  Cash balance, viz. Sums remaining in hand
    for Compositions                          £  30  0 0
  -- From Subscriptions and other receipts      381 12 0
                                                --------
                                                411 12 0
                                                         ------------
                                                         £1,494 16 10
                                                         ------------

The Treasurer has also reported to us that the Secretary and himself
have made arrangements by which they hope, during the ensuing year,
almost, if not altogether, to get rid of all arrear of outstanding
subscriptions. We trust that the Members will assist them in this very
desirable object; and especially that Members resident in the country
will transmit their subscriptions at once to the Treasurer by Post
Office orders. The adoption of this course has been suggested by several
of the Local Secretaries; and it is obvious that it will greatly lessen
the troublesome and not very agreeable duties, which are thrown upon
those officers by the present practice, will lessen the number of
mistakes, and will greatly promote the prosperity of the Society.

Dated the 30th April, 1842.

(Signed)

  LANCELOT SHARPE.
  B. CORNEY.


LAWS OF THE CAMDEN SOCIETY,

Adopted at the General Meeting, May 2, 1842.

I. That the Society shall be entitled “THE CAMDEN SOCIETY, for the
Publication of Early Historical and Literary Remains.”

II. That the objects of the Society shall be, First, the publication of
inedited Manuscripts; Second, the reprinting of Works of sufficient
rarity and importance to make Reprints desirable; and Third, the
publication of Translations of Historical Works not previously rendered
into English.

III. That the Society shall consist of One Thousand Two Hundred Members,
being Subscribers of One Pound annually; such Subscription to be paid in
advance, on or before the first day of May in every year.

IV. That the management of the affairs of the Society shall be vested in
a President and a Council consisting of fifteen Members, which President
and Council shall be elected annually by the Society at large, at a
General Meeting to be held on the 2nd day of May, being the Anniversary
of Camden’s birth; or on the Monday following, when the 2nd of May shall
happen to fall upon a Sunday.

V. That the President and Council shall, from amongst their own body,
elect a Director, who shall act as Chairman of the Council, in the
absence of the President, and also a Treasurer, and a Secretary.

VI. That the Accompts of the Receipts and Expenditure of the Society
shall be audited annually by three Auditors, to be elected at the
General Meetings, and that the Report of the Auditors, with an Abstract
of the Accompts, shall be published.

VII. That the names of Members proposed to be elected as President,
Council, and Auditors, shall be transmitted by the proposers to the
Secretary, one fortnight before the General Meeting, and that notice of
the persons so proposed shall be forwarded by the Secretary one week
before the General Meeting, to all the Members residing within the
limits of the Twopenny Post, and to all other Members who shall, in
writing, request to receive the same.

VIII. That no Member shall be entitled to vote at any General Meeting
whose Subscription is in arrear.

IX. That in every year one-fifth in number of the Council of the year
preceding shall be ineligible for re-election; and that in case any
Member of the Council shall not attend more than one-third of the number
of Meetings of the Council, such Member shall be considered to be one of
the retiring Members.

X. That in the absence of the President and Director, the Council at
their Meetings shall elect a Chairman, who shall have a casting vote
in case of equality of numbers, and shall also retain his right to vote
upon all questions submitted to the Council.

XI. That the Funds of the Society shall be disbursed in payment of
necessary expenses incident to the production of the Works of the
Society, and that all other expenses shall be avoided as much as
possible.

XII. That, after the Members of the Society shall have reached One
Thousand Two Hundred, vacancies in that number shall be filled up by the
Council, from time to time as they occur.

XIII. That every Member not in arrear of his Annual Subscription, shall
be entitled to One Copy of every Work published by the Society during
that year.

XIV. That the Members shall be invited to contribute or recommend Works
for publication.

XV. That Editors of Works printed by the Society shall be entitled to
Twenty Copies of the Works they edit.

XVI. That the Council shall determine what number of copies of each Work
shall be printed, and that the copies over and above those required by
the Members shall be sold in such manner, and at such prices, as shall
be fixed by the Council, the proceeds being carried to the account of
the Society.

XVII. That the Publications of the Society shall all form separate
and distinct Works, without any other connexion than that which must
necessarily exist between the volumes of such Works as consist of
several Volumes.

XVIII. That any Member of the Society may at any time compound for
his future Annual Subscriptions, by payment of £10 over and above his
Subscription for the current year.

XIX. That every Member of the Society who shall intimate to the
Council his desire to withdraw from the same, or who shall not pay
his Subscription for the current year within three Months after his
Election, or after such Subscription shall have become due, shall
thereupon cease to be a Member of the Society.

XX. That the Council may appoint Local Secretaries in such places, and
with such authorities as to them shall seem expedient; every Local
Secretary being a Member of the Society.

XXI. That no alteration shall be made in these Laws, except at a General
Meeting, nor then, unless One Month’s notice of any alteration intended
to be proposed at such Meeting shall have been given in writing to the
Secretary.


MEMBERS OF THE CAMDEN SOCIETY,
  for the
Fourth Year, Ending 2nd May, 1842.

_Those Members to whose names (c.) is prefixed have compounded for their
Annual Subscriptions. The Members whose names are printed in Capitals
were on the Council of the year._

  The Right Hon. LORD FRANCIS EGERTON, M.P. _President_.
  H. R. H. the DUKE OF SUSSEX, K.G., F.R.S. F.S.A.
  The Most Rev. and Right Hon. the LORD ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY.
  The Right Hon. LORD LYNDHURST, LL.D. F.R.S., LORD HIGH CHANCELLOR.
  The Most Hon. the MARQUESS OF NORTHAMPTON, D.C.L., Pres. R.S., F.S.A.
  The Right Hon. the EARL OF ABERDEEN, Pres. S.A., F.R.S.


Arthur Abbot, Esq. Exeter.
Abraham Abell, Esq, Cork.
Joseph Ablett, Esq. Llanbedr Hall, Ruthen.
Right Hon. Lord Viscount Acheson, M.P.
(c.) Sir Robert Shafto Adair.
John Adams, jun. Esq. M.A. Christ Church, Oxford.
John Adamson, Esq.
  Secretary of the Society of Antiquaries of Newcastle.
_Local Secretary at Newcastle._
Rev. James Adcock, M.A. Lincoln.
John Adolphus, Esq. F.S.A.
Professor Dr. Adrian, Librarian of the
  University of Giessen (Hesse Darmstadt).
John Yonge Akerman, Esq. F.S.A. Sec. Num. Soc.
(c.) Edward Nelson Alexander, Esq. F.S.A,
  _Local Secretary at Halifax_.
Robert Alexander, Esq. Q.C., F.R.S. F.S.A.
Robert Henry Allan, Esq. F.S.A.
  Treasurer of the Surtees Society.
  _Local Secretary at Durham._
George Edward Allen, Esq. Bath.
John Allen, Esq.
Mr. William Allen.
Richard Almack, Esq. F.S.A. Long Melford, Suffolk.
The Vicomte Louis d’Armaille, Paris.
Thomas Frederick Hill Alms, Esq.
George Henry Ames, Esq. Cote House, near Bristol.
Samuel Amory, Esq.
THOMAS AMYOT, Esq. F.R.S. Treas. S.A. _Director_.
A. P. Anderson, M.D.
Alexander Annand, Esq. F.S.A. Sutton, Surrey.
Thomas Chisholme Anstey, Esq.
Samuel Appleby, Esq. Gray’s Inn.
George Appleyard, Esq.
Rev. Thomas Arnold, D.D. Head Master of Rugby School.
M. le Chevalier Artaud, Membre de l’Institut de France.
Robert John Ashton, Esq. F.L.S.
The Athenæum Club.
George James Aungier, Esq.
Benjamin Austen, Esq.
William Ayrton, Esq. F.R.S., F.S.A.
W. Scrope Ayrton, Esq. F.S.A. Barrister-at-Law.

James Bacon, Esq. Barrister-at-Law.
Thomas Bacon, Esq. Redlands, Reading.
Edward Badeley, Esq. F.S.A. Temple.
The Right Hon. Lord Bagot, LL.D., F.S.A.
James Evan Baillie, Esq.
George Baker, Esq. _Local Secretary at Northampton._
Rev. Bulkeley Bandinel, D.D. Bodleian Librarian, Oxford.
George Banks, Esq. St. Catharine’s, near Doncaster.
Rev. Richard H. Barham, B.A.
Benjamin Barnard, Esq.
John Barnard, Esq.
Alfred Brooke Barnes, Esq.
Keith Barnes, Esq.
Ralph Barnes, Esq. Exeter.
Charles Frederick Barnwell, Esq. M.A. F.R.S., F.S.A.
Rev. John Bartholomew, Morchant.
John Baron, Esq. M.D. F.R.S.
Mr. J. Bartlett, Blandford.
Rt. Rev. the Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells,
  F.R.S. and F.S.A.
R. R. Bayley, Esq.
Thomas Baylis, Esq, F.S.A. Prior’s Bank, Fulham.
Rev. Thomas Vere Bayne, B.C.L. Warrington.
Edward Blake Beal, Esq.
Henry Ridley Beal, Esq.
Mr. Henry Mitchison Bealby.
John Beardmore, Esq.
Rev. Daniel Augustus Beaufort, A.M.
His Grace the Duke of Bedford.
Rev. Henry Bedford, Dunton Bassett.
The Bedford Permanent Library.
Alfred Beesley, Esq. Banbury.
James Bell, Esq.
Robert Bell, Esq. Advocate,
  Procurator for the Church of Scotland.
Thomas Bell, Esq. F.R.S.
  Professor of Zoology, King’s College, Lond.
Charles Bellamy, Esq. D.C.L.
  Fellow of St. John’s College, Oxford.
Samuel Beltz, Esq.
Mr. James Bennett, Tewkesbury.
Henry Bentley, Esq.
John Bentley, Esq. Birch House, near Bolton, Lancashire.
Michael Bentley, Esq.
Richard Bentley, Esq.
P. S. Benwell, Esq. Henley.
J. B. Bergne, Esq.
Samuel Berridge, Esq. Leicester.
(c.) The. Rev. John Besly, D.C.L.
  Vicar of Benton, Northumberland.
J. Richard Best, Esq. Botley Grange, Southampton.
Sir William Betham, Ulster King at Arms,
  F.S.A. M.R.I.A., _Local Secretary at Dublin_.
Richard Bethell, Esq. M.P. Rise, near Beverley.
M. le Comte Arthur Beugnot,
  Membre de l’Institut de France.
John Bevan, Esq. Cowbridge.
La Bibliothèque du Roi, Paris.
Robert Bickersteth, Esq. Liverpool.
John Bidwell, Esq. F.S.A.
Leonard Shelford Bidwell, Esq. F.S.A. Thetford.
Rev. George Augustus Biedermann,
  Rector of Dauntsey, Wilts.
Rev. Edward T. Bigge, M.A.
  Fellow of Merton Coll. Oxford.
Arthur Biggs, Esq. Bristol.
Edw. Charles Bird, Esq. Southwold.
Thomas Birkbeck, Esq.
The Birmingham Public Library.
John Black, Esq.
William Black, Esq.
Alexander Blair, Esq. LL.D. Bristol.
Dr. Malachi Blake, Taunton.
Rev. W. Blakesley, M.A. Trin. Coll. Camb.
Michael Bland, Esq. F.R.S., F.S.A.
Rev. George Bland, M.A.
Francis Lawrence Bland, Esq.
William Bland, Esq. Place House, Hartlip.
Charles Blandy, Esq. Reading.
(c.) John Jackson Blandy, Esq. Reading.
William Blandy, Esq. Reading.
Octavian Blewitt, Esq.
  Secretary to the Literary Fund Society.
(c.) Rev. Philip Bliss, D.C.L., F.S.A. Registrar of
  the Univ. of Oxford. _Local Secretary at Oxford._
Bindon Blood, Esq. F.R.S.E., F.S.A. Scot.,
  M.R.I.A. Edinburgh.
Edward Blore, Esq. D.C.L., F.S.A.
B. Blundell, Esq. Temple.
Rev. Wm. Blunt, B.A.
  Under Master of Merchant-Taylors’ School.
Miss Bockett, Southcote Lodge, Berks.
Henry G. Bohn, Esq.
Rev. J. A. Bolster, M.A., M.R.I.A.
  _Local Secretary at Cork._
Edward A. Bond, Esq.
Mr. William Boone.
Mr. Lionel Booth.
Rt. Hon. Sir John Bernard Bosanquet,
  one of the Judges of the Common Pleas, M.A.
Rev. Joseph Bosworth, LL.D., F.R.S., F.S.A.
  _Local Secretary at Nottingham._
William Fuller Boteler, Esq. M.A., Q.C.
(c.) Beriah Botfield, Esq. M.P., F.R.S., F.S.A.
  Norton Hall, Northamptonshire.
Rev. Thomas Bowdler, Sydenham.
Henry Bower, Esq. F.S.A. _Local Secretary at Doncaster._
  [Died Feb. 25, 1842.]
Rev. Thomas Frere Bowerbank, M.A. Vicar of Chiswick.
Mark Boyd, Esq.
David Bradberry, Esq.
Robert Greene Bradley, Esq. Bencher of Gray’s Inn.
Joseph Hoare Bradshaw, Esq.
George Weare Braikenridge, Esq. F.S.A.
  Brislington House, Som.
Edw. Henry Bramah, Esq. Reading.
Jonathan Brammall, Esq. Sheffield.
Rev. Thomas Brancker, M.A. Fellow of Wadham Coll. Oxford.
Right Hon. LORD BRAYBROOKE, F.S.A. Pres. Percy Society.
Edward Wedlake Brayley, Esq. F.S.A.
Henry Brice, Esq. Bristol.
Rev. Thomas Edward Bridges, D.D.
  President of Corpus Christi Coll. Oxford.
Benjamin Heywood Bright, Esq. Ham Green, near Bristol.
John Bright, Esq. M.D.
John Ruggles Brise, Esq.
  Spainshall, Finchingfield, Essex.
John Britton, Esq. F.S.A.
James Broadwood, Esq.
Thomas Broadwood, Esq.
William Brockedon, Esq. F.R.S.
John Trotter Brockett, Esq. F.S.A. Newcastle.
William Bromet, M.D., F.S.A. Surgeon 1st Life Guards.
(c.) Right Hon. Lord Brooke, St. John’s College, Oxford.
Francis Capper Brooke, Esq. Ufford Place, Suffolk.
Charles Bros, Esq.
The Right Hon. Lord Brougham and Vaux, F.R.S.
  Pres. of Univ. College, London, and Member
  of the National Institute of France.
Rev. John Brown, M.A.
  Vice-Master of Trinity College, Camb.
Samuel Cowper Brown, Esq. F.S.A.
  Shillingford Cross, Devon.
W. H. Brown, Esq.
Rev. G. A. Browne, M.A. Fellow of Trin. Coll. Camb.
Rt. Hon. Sir Jas. Lewis Knight Bruce,
  Vice Chancellor, F.R.S., F.S.A.
JOHN BRUCE, Esq. F.S.A. _Treasurer_.
Thomas Bruce, Esq. Shenfield.
Mr. Leonard Bruton, Bristol.
Rev. Guy Bryan, M.A., F.S.A.
  Rector of Woodham Walter, Essex.
  _Local Secretary at Maldon._
Mr. John Bryant.
Rev. George Buckeridge, M.A.
  Fellow of Worcester Coll. Oxford.
George Buckton, Esq. Oakfield.
Lieut.-Gen. Sir Henry Bunbury, K.C.B., F.S.A.
John Burder, Esq. F.S.A.
William Burge, Esq. Q.C., M.A., D.C.L.
John William Burgon, Esq. _Auditor_.
James Burn, Esq. W.S. Edinburgh.
Ven. Charles Parr Burney, D.D., F.R.S., F.S.A.
  Archdeacon of St. Alban’s.
John Burrell, Esq. Durham.
Robert Burrell, Esq. Durham.
Edmund Burrow, Esq.
Decimus Burton, Esq. F.R.S., F.S.A.
John Hill Burton, Esq. Advocate, Edinburgh.
Septimus Burton, Esq.
Rev. Thomas Byrth, M.A., F.S.A.,
  Rector of Wallasey, Cheshire.

Benjamin Bond Cabbell, Esq. F.R.S., F.S.A.
Frederick Caldwell, Esq.
Rev. Henry Calthrop, B.D.
  Fellow of Corpus Christi Coll. Camb.
Rt. Hon. Lord Campbell.
John Campbell, Esq.
Rt. Hon. the Earl of Camperdown.
Edward Capps, Esq.
Rev. Henry Card, D.D., F.S.A. Great Malvern.
J. S. Cardale, Esq, Leicester.
The Cardiff Institution.
(c.) The Rev. Edward Cardwell, D.D.
  CAMDEN’S Professor of Ancient History, Oxford.
(c.) Peter Stafford Carey, Esq. M.A.
Rt. Hon. the Earl of Carlisle, F.R.S.
Edward John Carlos, Esq.
A. N. Carmichael, Esq.
  Principal Classical Master at the Edinburgh Academy.
Rev. John Carr, M.A., Fellow of Balliol Coll. Oxford.
William Thomas Carr, Esq.
John Carter, Esq. Coventry.
George Alfred Carthew, Esq. East Dereham, Norfolk.
(c.) Cornelius Cartwright, Esq. Dudley.
Rev. W. Carus, M.A. Fellow of Trin. Coll. Camb.
The Rt. Hon. Earl Cawdor, F.R.S.
Mr. James Chaffin, Islington.
Thomas Chapman, Esq. F.S.A.
William Chapman, Esq. Richmond, Surrey.
William Chappell, Esq. F.S.A.
  Treasurer of the Percy and
  the Musical Antiq. Societies.
Mr. Emerson Charnley, Newcastle.
Sir William Chatterton, Bart.
J. M. G. Cheek, Esq. Evesham.
Rt. Rev. the Lord Bishop of Chichester.
(c.) John Walbanke Childers, Esq. M.P.
Francis Cholmeley, Esq. F.S.A.
Rev. Henry Christmas, M.A., F.R.S., F.S.A.
Henry Christy, Esq.
William Church, Esq. Streatley, Reading.
Rev. Thomas Townson Churton, M.A.
  Brazenose College, Oxford.
Rev. Francis Foreman Clark, B.A.
  Townfield House, near Newcastle, Staffordshire.
George Thomas Clark, Esq.
William Clark, M.D. Professor of Anatomy, Cambridge.
Charles Clark, Esq.
John Clarke, Esq. Southwark.
John Clarke, jun. Esq. Peatling Hall, Leicestershire.
Thomas Clarke, Esq. Knedlington, Yorkshire.
Thomas Clarke, Esq. F.S.A.
Rev. Piers C. Claughton, M.A.
  Fellow of Univ. Coll. Oxford.
Rev. Patrick Clason, D.D. Edinb.
Jacob Clements, Esq.
(c.) Rev. A. B. Clough, B.D., F.S.A., Jesus Coll. Oxford.
Charles Thornton Coathupe, Esq. Wraxhall, near Bristol.
James Cobb, Esq. Yarmouth.
J. Ingram Cobbin, Esq.
Sir William S. R. Cockburn, Bart. M.A., Bath.
William Colbourne, Esq. Chippenham.
Robert Cole, Esq.
Rev. Edward Coleridge, M.A.
Francis George Coleridge, Esq. Ottery St. Mary, Devon.
Henry Nelson Coleridge, Esq. M.A.
The Hon. Sir John Taylor Coleridge,
  one of the Judges of the Queen’s Bench, M.A.
JOHN PAYNE COLLIER, Esq. F.S.A.
  Director of the Shakespeare Society.
Mr. Edwin Collings, Bath.
Edward Collins, Esq.
Thomas Combe, Esq. Oxford.
Rev. C. Comberbach, Stonor.
Mr. John Comport, Stroud.
(c.) Rev. John Connop, M.A. Bradfield Hall, Berkshire.
Edward Conroy, Esq. M.A., M.R.I.A.
Lord Albert Conyngham, F.S.A.
Philip Davies Cooke, Esq. Owston, Yorkshire.
W. H. Cooke, Esq. Temple.
Charles Henry Cooper, Esq. Coroner for Cambridge.
CHARLES PURTON COOPER, Esq. Q.C., D.C.L., F.R.S., F.S.A.
Rev. James Cooper, M.A. St. Paul’s School.
Thomas Henry Cooper, Esq.
William Durrant Cooper, Esq. F.S.A.
Rev. William John Copeland, M.A.
  Fellow of Trinity College, Oxford.
James Copland, M.D. F.R.S.
The Lord Bishop of Cork, Cloyne, and Ross.
George Richard Corner, Esq. F.S.A.
(c.) Bolton Corney, Esq. Greenwich. _Auditor_.
Frederick Corrance, Esq. Loudham Hall, Suffolk.
Rev. Thomas Corser, Stand, Manchester.
Rev. G. E. Corrie, B.D. Fellow of Cath. Hall,
  and Norrisian Prof. of Div. in the Univ. of Cambridge.
Rt. Hon. Lord Cottenham.
Rev. William Charles Cotton, B.A.
  Student of Christ Ch. Oxford.
The Right Hon. Lord Courtenay.
The Right Hon. THOMAS P. COURTENAY. [Died July 8, 1841.]
Andrew Coventry, Esq. Advocate, Edinburgh.
S. P. Cox, Esq.
Mrs. Cox, Lawford, Essex.
George L. Craik, Esq.
Rev. John Antony Cramer, D.D. Public Orator, Oxford.
Rev. Richard Crawley, M.A. Steeple Ashton, Wiltshire.
Anthony Crofton, Esq. Barrister.
The Rt. Hon. John Wilson Croker, LL.D., F.R.S.
THOMAS CROFTON CROKER, Esq. F.S.A., M.R.I.A.
James Crofts, Esq.
James Crossley, Esq. _Local Secretary at Manchester._
James Dodsley Cuff, Esq.
George Godfrey Cunningham, Esq. Glasgow.
Peter Cunningham, Esq. Treasurer of the Shakspeare Soc.
Miss Richardson Currer, Eshton Hall, Yorkshire.
Henry Curwen, Esq. Workington Hall.
The Rev. Henry Curwen, Rector of Workington.

Edward Dalton, Esq. LL.D., F.S.A.
  Dunkirk House, near Minchinhampton, Gloucestershire.
George Daniel, Esq.
Rev. John Wareyn Darby, Framlingham.
George Webbe Dasent, Esq.
Rev. C. N. Davies, Norwood.
James Edward Davies, Esq.
Robert Davies, Esq.
Thomas Stephens Davies, Esq. F.R.S. L. and Ed. F.S.A.
  Prof. of Mathematics in Royal Military Acad. Woolwich.
David Elisha Davy, Esq. Ufford, Suffolk.
  _Local Secretary._
Matthew Dawes, Esq. F.G.S. Bolton-le-Moors.
Vesey Thomas Dawson, Esq.
Rev. Arthur Dayman, M.A.
  Fellow of Exeter College, Oxford.
W. Head Deacon, Esq. Long Cross, near Cardiff.
Charles Deane, Esq.
Rev. J. Bathurst Deane, M.A., F.S.A.
James Dearden, Esq. Rochdale.
Norris Deck, Esq. Cambridge.
Right Hon. Earl De Grey,
  Pres. of R. Inst. Br. Architects, F.S.A.
Joseph Delafield, Esq. F.R.S., F.S.A.
Rev. D. C. Delafosse, M.A. Vicar of Wandsworth.
Philip Chilwell De la Garde, Esq. Exeter.
Rt. Hon. Earl Delawarr.
George Dempster, Esq. of Skibo, Advocate.
Mons. Jules Desnoyers,
  Sec. de la Soc. de l’Histoire de France.
His Grace the Duke of Devonshire, K.G., D.C.L.
Hugh Welch Diamond, Esq. F.S.A.
  Hon. Libr. of the Numism. Soc.
John Ross Diamond, Esq.
F. H. Dickinson, Esq.
William Dickson, Esq. Edinburgh.
Count Maurice Dietrichstein,
  Prefect of the Imp. Library at Vienna,
  Associate of the Numismatic Soc. of London, &c.
Charles Wentworth Dilke, Esq. LL.B.
Joseph C. Dimsdale, Esq.
John Disney, Esq. The Hyde, Ingatestone.
I. D’Israeli, Esq. D.C.L., F.S.A.
(c.) George Dodd, Esq. M.P., F.S.A.
Charles Cooper Doggett, Esq.
William Fishburn Donkin, Esq. B.A.
  Fellow of Univ. Coll. Oxford.
Edward Douglas, Esq. Christ Ch. Oxf.
John Edward Dowdeswell, Esq. Pull Court, Worcestershire.
Charles Downes, Esq.
Thomas Doyley, Esq. D.C.L. Serjeant-at-Law.
William Richard Drake, Esq. Reading.
The Rev. W. Drake, M.A. Collegiate School, Leicester.
Rev. Pearce William Drew, Youghal.
Charles Seymour Dubourg, Esq.
Samuel Duckworth, Esq. M.A. Master in Chancery.
Adam Duff, Esq. Woodcott House, Oxfordshire.
George Duke, Esq.
  Barrister-at-Law, St. Leonard’s, Sussex.
Thomas Farmer Dukes, Esq. F.S.A. Shrewsbury.
Andrew Dun, Esq. W.S., M.A., F.A.S. Scot. Edinburgh.
Philip Bury Duncan, Esq. M.A.
  Keeper of the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford.
David Dundas, Esq. M.A. Temple.
William Pitt Dundas, Esq. Advocate, Edinburgh.
James Dunlop, Esq. W.S. Edinburgh.
John Dunn, Esq. Paisley.
Enoch Durant, Esq. F.S.A.
Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of Durham, F.R.S., F.S.A.
Mons. Dusommerard, Hôtel de Cluny, Paris.
Rev. Alexander Dyce, B.A.
William Dyce, Esq. School of Design, Somerset-house.
Rev. John Bradley Dyne, M.A.
  Fellow of Wadham College, Oxford.

Mr. Thomas Eaton, Worcester.
Thomas Edgworth, Esq.
Rev. Andrew Edwards, B.D.,
  Fellow of Magdalen Coll. Oxford.
Edward Hugh Edwards, Esq.
Joseph Berry Edwards, Esq. Southwold.
The Rt. Hon. George Earl of Egremont, F.S.A.
Benjamin Elam, Esq.
Rev. H. T. Ellacombe, M.A., F.S.A. Bitton near Bristol.
Sir HENRY ELLIS, K.H., LL.B., F.R.S., Sec. S.A.,
  Principal Librarian of the British Museum.
Rev. John Joseph Ellis, M.A., F.S.A.
Joseph Ellis, jun. Esq. Richmond.
John Fullerton Elphinstone, Esq.
Hastings Elwin, Esq.
William Empson, Esq. M.A.
Dr. Endlicher, Vienna.
Rt. Hon. Thomas Erskine,
  Chief Judge of the Bankruptcy Court.
George Essell, Esq. Rochester.
Thomas Grimston Bucknall Estcourt, Esq. M.P. for the
  University of Oxford. Estcourt, Gloucestershire.
Rev. Henry H. Evans.
Herbert Norman Evans, Esq.
Thomas Evans, Esq. Cardiff.
John Leman Ewen, Esq. Southwold.
Edmund Eyton, Esq.

James Falconar, Esq. F.S.A.
James William Farrer, Esq. Master in Chancery.
Mr. Thomas Faulkner, Chelsea.
Mr. William Faulkner, Chelsea.
Rev. Godfrey Faussett, D.D.
  Margaret Professor of Divinity, Oxf.
Joseph Fearn, Esq.
Tarver R. Fearnside, Esq.
Dr. Feder, Privy Councillor, and Head Librarian,
  to the Court of Hesse Darmstadt.
Rev. George O. Fenwicke, F.S.A. Aston near Birmingham.
  _Local Secretary at Birmingham._
Sir Charles Dalrymple Fergusson,
  of Hailes and Kilkerran, Bart.
Copley Fielding, Esq. Brighton.
Rev. Henry Fielding, M.A.
  Salmonby Rectory near Horncastle.
William Figg, Esq. Lewes.
Charles Filica, Esq.
John Joseph Ashby Fillinham, Esq.
Charles John Fisher, Esq. Jesus College, Cambridge.
John Goate Fisher, Esq. Yarmouth.
Paul Hawkins Fisher, Esq. The Castle, Stroud.
Wm. Stevenson Fitch, Esq. _Local Secretary at Ipswich._
Robert Fitch, Esq. Norwich.
Edward Herbert Fitzherbert, Esq. M.A., Barrister at Law.
Richard Wilson FitzPatrick, Esq.
  South Luffenham, Rutland.
The Right Hon. Earl FitzWilliam.
Sir Hesketh Fleetwood, Bart. Rossall Hall, Lancashire.
(c.) Thomas W. Fletcher, Esq. F.R.S., F.S.A.
  _Local Secretary at Dudley._
(c.) Rev. William Fletcher, M.A.
  _Local Secretary at Derby._
(c.) John Harris Flooks, Esq. Wilton.
Sir William J. H. Browne Folkes, Bart. F.R.S., F.S.A.
(c.) George Folliott, Esq. Vicar’s Cross, Chester.
Thomas G. Fonnereau, Esq. F.S.A.
M. de la Fontenelle de Vaudoré,
  Conseiller à la Cour Royale de Poitiers,
  For. Memb. S.A.
Charles Ford, Esq.
G. J. Ford, Esq. Exeter Coll. Oxf.
Rev. Josiah Forshall, M.A., F.R.S., F.S.A.
  Secretary to the British Museum.
John Forster, Esq. Newton-in-the-Willows.
Matthew Forster, Esq. Belsize, Hampstead.
Hon. George M. Fortescue.
Edward Foss, Esq. F.S.A.
Rev. W. W. Fowler, Darley, near Derby.
Lieut.-Colonel Charles Richard Fox.
Henry Ralph Francis, Esq. M.A.
  late Fellow of St. John’s College, Cambridge.
Miss Francis, Hampstead.
Richard Frankum, Esq.
Thomas Fraser, Esq. Advocate, Inner Temple.
Mons. Frère, Rouen.
Thomas Frewen, Esq. Cold Overton, Leicestershire.
Charles Frost, Esq. F.S.A.
  Pres. of the Lit. and Philos. Soc. of Hull.
  _Local Secretary at Hull._
Baldwin Fulford, Esq. Great Fulford, Devon.
(c.) John Lewis Ffytche, Esq.
  Linc. Coll. Oxf., Thorpe Hall, Louth.

Charles Gambier, Esq. Harley-street.
James Gandy, jun. Esq. Heave’s Lodge, near Kendal.
Rev. Richard Garnett, F.S.A. British Museum.
Thomas Garrard, Esq. F.S.A. Bristol.
Thomas Gaspey, Esq.
Mr. Geeves, Regent-street.
Herr von Gévay, Vienna.
Professor Aug. Fred. Gfroerer,
  Director of the Royal Library, Stuttgardt.
Humphrey Gibbs, Esq.
Joseph Gibbs, Esq. M.I.C.E.
John Gidley, Esq. Exeter.
Edward Gifford, Esq. Admiralty.
Richard James Gilman, Esq.
William Anthony Gilman, Esq.
Thomas Ward Gleadow, Esq. Hull.
The Literary and Scientific Association of Gloucester.
John Hulbert Glover, Esq. F.S.A.
  Librarian to Her Majesty.
Sir Stephen Richard Glynne, Bart. F.S.A.
George Godwin, jun. Esq. F.R.S. F.S.A.
Gabriel Goldney, Esq.
Aaron Asher Goldsmid, Esq.
Sir Isaac Lyon Goldsmid, Bart. F.R.S., F.S.A.
Rev. Charles Portales Golightly, M.A.
  Oriel College, Oxford.
Rev. W. Goode.
James Gooden, Esq. F.S.A.
Jonathan Gooding, Esq.
  _Local Secretary at Southwold._
Alexander Gordon, jun. Esq.
Richard Gosling, Esq.
The Gottingen University Library.
James Robert Gowen, Esq. F.G.S.
John Black Gracie, Esq. F.S.A. Sc. Edinburgh.
Charles Graham, Esq. F.S.A.
Rev. Robert Henry Gray, Christ Church, Oxford.
The Library of the Hon. Society of Gray’s Inn.
Charles Green, Esq. Spalding.
Henry Green, Esq.
Thomas Abbott Green, Esq. Bedford.
John Greenall, Esq. Warrington.
Benjamin W. Greenfield, Esq. Shirley, Southampton.
Hon. and Rev. George Neville Grenville, M.A.
  Master of Magdalene Coll. Camb.
Right Hon. Thomas Grenville, F.S.A.
John Morewood Gresley, Esq. Exeter College, Oxford.
Charles Cavendish Greville, Esq.
Philip Griffith, Esq.
Rev. Robert H. Groome, M.A. Caius Coll. Camb.
(c.) The Right Hon. Earl Grosvenor.
John Grundy, Esq. Hampton Court Palace.
The Lady Charlotte E. Guest.
Edwin Guest, Esq. M.A. Fellow of Caius Coll. Camb.
Sir John Guise, Bart. Rendcomb, Gloucestershire.
John Lewis Guillemard, M.A. F.R.S.
Daniel Gurney, Esq. F.S.A.
(c.) Hudson Gurney, Esq. V.P.S.A., F.R.S.
The Hon. Sir John Gurney,
  one of the Barons of the Exchequer.
Rev. John Hampden Gurney, M.A. Lutterworth.
John Mathew Gutch, Esq. F.S.A.
  _Local Secretary at Worcester._
Frederick Gwatkin, Esq.
Mr. Henry Gwyn.

Miss Hackett, Clapham, Surrey.
William D. Haggard, Esq. F.S.A., F.R.A.S., M.N.S.
Mr. David Haig, Advocates’ Library, Edinburgh.
Edward Hailstone, Esq.
  Horton House, near Bradford, Yorkshire.
Alexander Haldane, Esq. Barrister.
Sir Henry Halford, Bart. G.C.H. M.D. F.R.S.
  Pres. of the College of Physicians,
  and Physician to the Queen.
Mr. Charles Hall, Blandford.
Rev. George W. Hall, D.D.
  Master of Pembroke College, Oxford.
Giles Hall, Esq. Gloucester.
John Hall, Esq.
John Charles Hall, Esq.
(c.) Thomas Henry Hall, F.R.S. Barrister-at-Law.
Henry Hallam, Esq. M.A., F.R.S. V.P.S.A.
Charles William Hallett, Esq.
James Orchard Halliwell, Esq. F.R.S. F.S.A.
William Richard Hamilton, Esq. F.R.S., V.P.S.A.
Robert Handyside, Esq. Advocate, Edinburgh.
Philip Augustus Hanrott, Esq. F.S.A.
(c.) J. A. Hardcastle, Esq. Hatcham House, New Cross.
George Perfect Harding, Esq. F.S.A.
Joseph Harding, Esq. Finchley.
E. T. Harding, Esq. Librarian to the King of Hanover.
John Stockdale Hardy, Esq. F.S.A. Leicester.
(c.) Ven. Julius Charles Hare, M.A. Archdeacon of Lewes.
Edward Harman, Esq. F.S.A.
Rev. William Harness, M.A.
Robert Harris, Esq. Reading.
Edward M. Harrison, Esq.
Wm. F. Harrison, Esq. M.N.S. Rochester.
William Henry Harrison, Esq.
Right Hon. the Earl of Harrowby, F.S.A.
Marmaduke Hart Hart, Esq.
Solomon Alexander Hart, Esq. R.A.
Rev. Charles Henry Hartshorne, M.A., F.S.A.
Lieut.-Col. Harvey, Thorpe Lodge, Norfolk.
  [Died Feb. 9, 1842.]
Henry Paul Harwood, Esq. M.D. Sheffield.
James Hastie, Esq.
Henry Hatcher, Esq. _Local Secretary at Salisbury._
Charles Havell, Esq. Reading.
Rev. Edward Hawkins, D.D.
  Provost of Oriel College, Oxford.
Edward Hawkins, Esq. F.R.S. F.S.A.
Rev. Edward Craven Hawtrey, D.D., F.S.A.,
  Head Master of Eton.
E. W. Drummond Hay, Esq. F.S.A. Lond. and Sc.
Rev. J. M. Heath, M.A. Fellow of Trinity Coll. Camb.
John Benjamin Heath, Esq. F.S.A.
Sir William Heathcote, Bart. D.C.L. M.P.
Henry Heffill, Esq. Diss, Norfolk.
Henry Heintz, Esq.
Bathurst Hemans, Esq. Barrister-at-Law.
Alexander Henderson, M.D., F.S.A.
James Henwood, Esq. Hull.
Hon. Algernon Herbert, M.A.
Thomas Hewitt, Esq. M.A. Cork.
Henry William Hewlett, Esq.
James Heywood, Esq. F.R.S. F.S.A.
Thomas Heywood, Esq. F.S.A. Ledbury.
George Hickman, Esq. Marlow.
Rev. W. Hildyard, Market Deeping.
Henry Hill, Esq. Barrister-at-Law.
(c.) Rev. Herbert Hill, Fellow of New College, Oxford.
Jere Hill, Esq. Bristol.
Matthew D. Hill, Esq. Q.C.
John Hills, Esq. M.A.
John Hodgson Hinde, Esq. M.P.
J. H. Hippisley, Esq.
Francis Hobler, jun. Esq. Sec.N.S.
Langford Lovel Hodge, Esq.
Sampson Hodgkinson, Esq.
Rev. John Hodgson, M.R.S.L. Vice-Pres. Soc. Ant. Newc.
W. B. Hodgson, Esq. Liverpool.
James Maitland Hog, Esq. of Newliston.
Thomas Holden, Esq.
(c.) James Holding, Esq. Basingstoke.
Rt. Hon. the Dowager Lady Holland.
(c.) Robert Hollond, Esq. M.P., M.A. Barrister-at-Law.
Richard Hollier, Esq. F.S.A.
Mr. M. M. Holloway.
Bryan Holme, Esq. New Inn.
Edward Holme, M.D. Manchester.
John Holmes, Esq. F.S.A. East Retford.
  [Died May 25, 1841.]
John Holmes, Esq. F.S.A. British Museum.
Robert Home, Esq.
Mr. W. Hood.
Frederick B. Hooper, Esq. Reading.
John Hooper, Esq. Reading.
Alexander Beresford Hope, Esq.
  Trinity College, Cambridge.
James Robert Hope, Esq. B.C.L.
  Fellow of Merton Coll. Oxford.
John Hope, Esq.
  Dean of the Faculty of Advocates, Edinburgh.
Charles Hopkinson, Esq. M.A.
  Queen’s College, Oxford.
William Hopkinson, Esq.
  _Local Secretary at Stamford._
Alfred John Horwood, Esq.
William Hosking, Esq. F.S.A.
Chandos Wren Hoskyns, Esq.
  Wroxhall Abbey, Warwickshire.
Abraham Howard, Esq.
Edward Howes, Esq. M.A.
Rev. F. Howes, M.A. Norwich.
John Hubback, Esq. Barrister-at-Law.
Rev. John William Hughes, M.A. Trin. Coll. Oxford.
William Hughes Hughes, Esq. M.P. Barrister-at-Law.
The Hull Subscription Library.
William Powell Hunt, Esq. Ipswich.
Rev. Evan Haynes Hunter, B.A.
John Hunter, Esq. jun. W.S.
Rev. JOSEPH HUNTER, F.S.A.
Mr. William Hurley.
(c.) Richard Charles Hussey, Esq. F.S.A., Birmingham.
(c.) Rev. Robert Hussey, B.D.
  Student of Christ Church, Oxford.
Mrs. Hutcheson, Bristol.

John Ibbotson, Esq.
Sir Robert Harry Inglis, Bart. LL.D. F.R.S., F.S.A.,
  M.P. for the University of Oxford.
(c.) Rev. James Ingram, D.D., F.S.A.
  President of Trin. Coll. Oxford.
The Royal Irish Academy.
David Irving, Esq. LL.D. Edinburgh.
James Ivory, Esq. Solicitor-General for Scotland.
The Islington Literary and Scientific Society.

Henry Jackson, Esq. Sheffield.
Rev. Stephen Jackson, M.A. Ipswich.
Rev. Thomas Jackson, M.A.
  Incumbent of St. Peter’s, Mile End.
B. Jacob, Esq. Dorchester.
Rev. William Jacobson, M.A.
  Vice-Principal of Magdalen Hall, Oxf.
John Richmond Jaffray, Esq.
G. P. R. James, Esq. The Shrubbery, Walmer.
David Jardine, Esq. Barrister-at-law.
Rev. Richard Jenkyns, D.D.
  Master of Balliol Coll. Oxford.
Right Hon. Sir Herbert Jenner, LL.D.,
  Dean of the Arches.
Mr. Robert Jennings.
William Jerdan, Esq. F.S.A.
James Jermyn, Esq. Reydon, Suffolk.
Edward Jesse, Esq. Windsor.
Mr. George James Johnson, Reading.
Maurice Johnson, Esq. Spalding.
Charles Jones, Esq.
George Jones, Esq. R.A.
Rev. H. Longueville Jones, M.A. Paris.
Michael Jones, Esq. F.S.A.
Pitman Jones, Esq. _Local Secretary at Exeter._
Richard Jones, Esq.
William Bruce Jones, Esq. M.A. Oxford,
  Barrister-at-Law.
William Samuel Jones, Esq.
Henry Holmes Joy, Esq.

Herr Theodor von Karajan,
  Hofkammer-Archiv’s Beamte, Vienna.
Edwin Keats, Esq.
Fitzroy Kelly, Esq. M.P., Q.C.
John M. Kemble, Esq. M.A.
Robert Palmer Kemp, Esq. Yarmouth.
Russell Kendall, Esq.
  Gifford’s Hall, Stoke by Nayland, Suffolk.
Rev. George Kennard.
John Kenyon, Esq.
Philip Kernan, Esq.
James Kerr, Esq. Coventry.
John Kerr, Esq. _Local Secretary at Glasgow._
Edward Key, Esq. Holbeach.
Richard T. Kindersley, Esq. Q.C.
Frederick King, Esq. Fulham.
Mr. John Venables King.
Richard John King, Esq. Exeter College, Oxford.
Joseph Chas. King, Esq. St. John’s Wood.
Thomas W. King, Esq. F.S.A.
  Rouge Dragon Pursuivant of Arms.
Paul Augustine Kingdon, Esq. Exeter College, Oxford.
George Ritchie Kinloch, Esq. Edinb.
Charles Knight, Esq.
Henry Gally Knight, Esq. M.P., F.S.A.
William Knight, Esq. F.S.A.
Rev. Erskine Knollys, M.A. Merton Coll. Oxford.
Rev. Charles Knyvett, Windsor.
Charles König, Esq. K.H., F.R.S.
Herr Matth. Kupitsch, Antiquarian bookseller at Vienna.

Rt. Hon. Henry Labouchere, M.P.
David Laing, Esq. F.S.A. L. & Sc. Edinburgh.
Rev. F. Laing, M.A. Tewkesbury.
Rev. John Lamb, D.D. Master of Corpus Christi Coll. Camb.
John Newton Lane, Esq. King’s Bromley Manor, Lichfield.
William Lang, Esq. Bristol.
Right Hon. Lord Langdale, Master of the Rolls.
Arthur S. Larken, Esq. St. Alban’s Hall, Oxford.
(c.) Dr. J. M. Lappenberg, For. Memb. Soc. Ant.
  _Local Secretary at Hamburg._
Mons. de Larenaudière,
  V.P. de la Soc. de Geographie de Paris,
  Chev. de la Legion d’Honneur, &c.
Mr. W. Law.
Andrew Lawson, Esq. Boroughbridge.
Sir William Lawson, Bart. F.S.A.
Robert Leadbitter, Esq. Newcastle.
Lt.-Col. Wm. Martin Leake, F.R.S.
Rev. J. E. Leefe.
P. Bainbridge Le Hunt, Esq. Ashbourne.
Robert Lemon, Esq. F.S.A. State Paper Office.
Charles Lever, Esq.
Peter Levesque, Esq.
Rev. T. T. Lewis, M.A. Bridstow, near Ross.
  _Local Secretary_.
Mr. Lewis A. Lewis.
Robert Leycester, Esq. Cork.
William Liddiard, Esq.
Alfred Lillingston, Esq. Southwold.
Mr. Joseph Lilly.
The Lincoln Permanent Library.
Mons. Le Roux de Lincy, Paris.
John Lindsay, Esq. Barrister-at-Law, Maryville, Cork.
Rev. John Lingard, D.D. Hornby, Lancashire.
Thomas Henry Lister, Esq.
The Rt. Hon. Sir Joseph Littledale, M.A.
Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of Llandaff,
  Dean of St. Paul’s, F.S.A.
Edward John Lloyd, Esq. M.A. Barrister-at-Law.
George Lloyd, Esq. Brynestyn, near Wrexham.
William Horton Lloyd, Esq. F.S.A.
Mr. Richard Lloyd, Holloway.
Sir Joseph Lock, Oxford.
Henry F. Lockwood, Esq. F.S.A. Hull.
Rev. John Lodge, M.A.
  Librarian of the University of Cambridge.
  _Local Secretary at Cambridge._
City of London Library, Guildhall.
The London Library.
The London Institution.
The City of London Literary and Scientific Institution.
Gwalter B. Lonsdale, Esq.
Rev. John Lonsdale, M.A.
  Principal of King’s College, London.
C. W. Loscombe, Esq. Clifton.
Henry Albert Loscombe, Esq. Andover.
Very Rev. Thomas Hill Lowe, M.A. Dean of Exeter.
(c.) James Lucas, Esq. Stirling.
Samuel Lucas, Esq. Bristol.
Ebenezer Ludlow, Esq. M.A. Serjeant-at-Law.
Robert Wheatley Lumley, Esq.
Edmund Ormond Lyne, Esq.

Colin Campbell Macaulay, Esq. Leicester.
John David Macbride, Esq. D.C.L.
  Principal of Magdalen Hall, Oxf.
Le Conseilleur Commandeur de Macedo,
  Secretary General of the
  Royal Society of Sciences, Madrid.
Andrew D. M’Kellar, Esq.
Rev. Charles Mackenzie, St. Olave’s, Southwark.
J. Whitefoord Mackenzie, Esq. W.S., Edinburgh.
James Macknight, Esq. W.S., Edinburgh.
Miss Macleod.
William M’Mahon, Esq.
The Hon. Alexander Maconochie, Lord Meadowbank.
Allan A. Maconochie, Esq. Advocate.
James A. Maconochie, Esq. Advocate, Sheriff of Orkney.
Robert Maconochie, Esq.
(c.) Sir FREDERIC MADDEN, K.H., F.R.S. F.S.A.
  Keeper of the MSS. in the British Museum.
James Maidment, Esq. F.S.A. Scot.
Rev. Samuel Roffy Maitland, F.R.S. F.S.A.
  Librarian to the Archbishop of Canterbury.
Sir Alexander Malet, Bart.
  Sec. of Legation at the Hague.
Benjamin Heath Malkin, Esq. LL.D.
Edward Heath Mammett, Esq. F.G.S. Ashby de la Zouche.
Thomas John Manchee, Esq. Bristol.
W. S. Mare, Esq. Magdalen College, Cambridge.
James Heywood Markland, Esq. F.R.S., F.S.A.
  Treasurer of the Roxburghe Club.
  _Local Secretary at Bath._
Rev. Herbert C. Marsh, M.A. Prebendary of Peterborough.
Robert Marsham, Esq. D.C.L.,
  Warden of Merton College, Oxford.
George Martin, Esq. M.A. Cork.
John Martin, Esq. F.L.S. Woburn.
Studley Martin, Esq. Liverpool.
Theodore Martin, Esq. Edinburgh.
Philip Martineau, Esq.
Thomas Mason, Esq. F.S.A. Copt Hewick, near Ripon.
Thomas Bardwell Mason, Esq.
William Matchett, Esq. Bracondale, Norwich.
John Mee Mathew, Esq. F.S.A.
William Constable Maxwell, Esq.
  Everingham Park, Yorkshire.
Daniel Charles Meadows, Esq. Great Bealing, Suffolk.
Rev. Thomas Medland, B.D.,
  Fellow of Corpus Christi Coll. Oxford.
(c.) David Melville, Esq. B.A. Brasenose Coll. Oxford.
John Herman Merivale, Esq. F.S.A. Barrister-at-Law.
Samuel Merriman, M.D.
Francis Mewburn, Esq. Darlington.
A. G. F. Meyer, Counsellor of Justice, Hanover.
George Meynell, Esq. York.
Sir Samuel Rush Meyrick, K.H., F.S.A.
Mons. Michelet, Memb. de l’Institut,
  Professeur d’Histoire au Collège Royal de France.
John Miland, Esq.
Andrew Miller, Esq. Cardiff.
(c.) William Henry Miller, Esq. F.S.A.
Samuel Mills, jun. Esq.
Rev. Thomas Mills, Rector of Stutton, Suffolk.
Rev. William Mills, D.D. Exeter.
Rev. Henry Hart Milman, M.A.
  Prebendary of Westminster.
Thomas Mist, Esq. Fulham.
Richard Mitchell, Esq. Enderby Hall, Leicestershire.
Henry Mitchison, Esq.
  V.P. of Islington Lit. and Scient. Society.
  [Died Sept. 3d, 1841.]
Rev. John Mitford, M.A., Rector of Benhall, Suffolk.
Nathaniel Cranch Moginie, Esq.
Mons. Monmerqué, Membre de l’Institut de France.
John Moore, Esq. F.S.A.
  Danefield House, Henley-upon-Thames.
  [Died April 1842.]
Mr. John Moore, Tewkesbury.
Maurice Peter Moore, Esq. Sleaford.
Thomas Moore, Esq. Sloperton Cottage, Devizes.
Thomas Moore, Esq. F.S.A.
Rev. W. Moore, D.D. Holbeach.
Edward Raleigh Moran, Esq.
Louis Selliers Chevalier de Moranville,
  Amanuensis Imp. Library, Vienna.
John Shank More, Esq. Advocate, Edinburgh.
William Bowyer Morgan, Esq.
John Morice, Esq. F.S.A.
W. C. Morland, Esq.
Mr. John Morris, Bath.
Rev. James Morton, B.D. Prebendary of Lincoln.
  _Local Secretary at Holbeach._
Mr. William Richard Morton.
Joseph Moule, Esq.
  Resident of the General Post Office, Edinburgh.
Thomas Moule, Esq.
J. D. Moxon, Esq. Bristol.
James Patrick Muirhead, Esq. M.A. Edinburgh.
Baron Eligius von Münch-Bellinghausen,
  Kh. Hof-Secretär, Vienna,
The Right Hon. the Earl of Munster,
  F.R.S., P.R.A.S., M.R.S.L.
  [Died March 20, 1842.]
Rev. Jerom Murch, Bath.
Charles Robert Scott Murray, Esq.
  Christ Church, Oxford.
Rt. Hon. Sir John Archibald Murray,
  one of the Lords of Session in Scotland.
John Murray, Esq. Albemarle-street.
Thomas Murray, Esq. LL.D. Edinb.
Sir Francis W. Myers, K.C.S.
  Pentlow Hall, near Sudbury, Suffolk.
Peter Rickards Mynors, Esq.

Rev. C. Nairne, Lincoln.
(c.) T. C. Neale, Esq. Chelmsford.
Richard Neave, jun. Esq.
John Nedham, Esq. Leicester.
Joseph Neeld, Esq. F.S.A.
John Newman, Esq. F.S.A.
Charles Thomas Newton, Esq. B.A.
  Student of Christ Church, Oxf.
Iltyd Nicholl, Esq. Usk, near Monmouth.
Mrs. S. Nichols, Highbury Place.
J. Bowyer Nichols, Esq. F.S.A.
John Gough Nichols, Esq. F.S.A.,
  Treasurer of the Surtees Society.
(c.) Rev. William L. Nichols, M.A.
Alexander Nicholson, Esq. F.S.A.
  Lond. and Scotl., Ufford, Suffolk.
George Stewart Nicholson, Esq.
George Barons Northcote, Esq. Exeter College, Oxford.
Nicholas Nugent, Esq. M.D.

George Offer, Esq.
Rev. George Oliver, Exeter.
George Ormerod, Esq. D.C.L. F.R.S. F.S.A.
Thomas Osler, Esq. Bristol.
Frederick Ottley, Esq. Barrister-at-Law.
Rt. Hon. Sir Gore Ouseley, G.C.H. F.R.S. F.S.A.
Frederick Ouvry, Esq.
Rev. Peter Ouvry, M.A.
The Oxford and Cambridge Club.

Cornelius Paine, jun. Esq.
William Dunkley Paine, Esq.
Samuel Alexander Pagan, Esq.
Peter Page, Esq. East Sheen.
Sir Francis Palgrave, K.H. F.R.S., F.S.A.
Alfred Zouch Palmer, Esq. Sonning, Berks.
Arthur Palmer, Esq. Bristol.
Arthur Hare Palmer, Esq. Bristol.
Charles John Palmer, Esq. F.S.A.
  _Local Secretary at Yarmouth._
Henry Andrewes Palmer, Esq. Bristol.
John Palmer, Esq. Dorney Court, Windsor.
Rev. William Palmer, M.A.,
  Worcester College, Oxford.
The Hon. Sir James Parke, Knt.
  one of the Barons of the Exchequer.
Charles Parker, Esq.
John Henry Parker, Esq. Oxford.
John W. Parker, Esq. West Strand.
Kenyon S. Parker, Esq.
Joseph Parkes, Esq.
Rev. Richard Parkinson,
  Fellow of Christ Church, Manchester.
Thomas Parry, Esq.
John Parsons, Esq. Oxford.
The Hon. Sir John Patteson,
  one of the Judges of the Court of Queen’s Bench, M.A.
Jacob Howell Pattisson, Esq. LL.B. Witham, Essex.
L. Paulding, Esq. Stockport.
Rev. Frederick Pawsey, B.A. Vicar of Wilhelmsted, Beds.
Mr. J. G. Payne, Wallingford.
John Thos. Payne, Esq. Pall Mall.
Anthony Peacock, Esq.
Reginald Peacock, Esq. Downhill House, near Sunderland.
Rev. J. R. Pears, Bath.
Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Peel, M.P., F.R.S. F.S.A.
Thomas Pemberton, Esq. Q.C. M.P.
Henry Perkins, Esq.
Rev. Charles Perry, M.A.
  Fellow and Tutor of Trinity Coll. Camb.
Alexander Peterkin, Esq. Edinburgh.
Mr. John Petheram.
Louis Hayes Petit, Esq. F.R.S. F.S.A.
Thomas Joseph Pettigrew, Esq. F.R.S. F.S.A.
W. V. Pettigrew, Esq. M.D.
Joseph Philips, Esq. Leicester.
Johnson Phillott, Esq. Bath.
Mr. Wm. Pickering, Piccadilly.
Rev. John Piccope, Manchester.
Henry Clark Pidgeon, Esq.
Simon Fraser Piggott, Esq. Barrister-at-Law.
Rev. John Hearne Pinckney, D.D. East Sheen.
John Pitcairn, Esq.
(c.) Robert Pitcairn, Esq. F.S.A. Scotland.
Jas. Robinson Planché, Esq. F.S.A.
Thomas Joshua Platt, Esq. Q.C.
Charles Innes Pocock, Esq. Bristol.
Lewis Pocock, Esq. F.S.A.
George Pococke, Esq.
Edward Polhill, Esq. F.S.A. Brighton.
James Prince Pollard, Esq.
Archer Polson, Esq.
William G. Ponsonby, Esq. M.A. Gray’s Inn.
Thomas Ponton, Esq. M.A. F.S.A.
Rev. Thomas Pooley, M.A.
  Rector of Thornton in Lonsdale, Yorks.
Robert Porrett, Esq. F.S.A.
John Powell Powell, Esq. Quex Park, Thanet.
Richard Cowley Powell, Esq. Exeter College, Oxford.
Right Hon. the Earl of Powis,
  President of the Roxburghe Club.
Charles Poynder, Esq. Henley-upon-Thames.
Samuel P. Pratt, Esq. Bath.
Rev. Jermyn Pratt, Rector of Campsey Ash, Suffolk.
(c.) Osmond de Beauvoir Priaulx, Esq.
  Barrister-at-Law.
Rev. Thomas Price, D.D. Hackney.
Richard Price, Esq. M.P.
Rev. George Proctor, D.D.
G. H. Proctor, Esq. Balliol College, Oxford.
Robert Proctor, Esq.
Thomas Prothero, jun. Esq.
Edward Protheroe, Esq. M.P. F.S.A.
Rt. Hon. Lord Prudhoe.
Marlborough Pryor, Esq. Hampstead.
James Brook Pulham, Esq.
Hamilton Pyper, Esq. Advocate, Edinburgh.

Madame la Maréchale Duchesse de Raguse.
Henry Raikes, Esq. Chester.
J. M. Rainbow, Esq.
Rev. James Raine, M.A. F.S.A. Newc.,
  Secretary of the Surtees Society.
Charles Ranken, Esq. B.A., Gray’s Inn.
Francis Harrison Rankin, Esq. F.R.G.S.
  _Local Secretary at Liverpool._
Christopher Rawson, Esq. F.G.S. President of the
  Halifax Literary and Philosophical Society.
W. Rayner, Esq. M.D. Stockport.
Rev. Joseph Bancroft Reade, M.A. F.R.S. Peckham.
John Read, Esq. Derwent Hall near Sheffield.
Richard Reece, Esq. F.S.A. Cardiff.
Rev. Thomas Rees, LL.D., F.S.A.
Henry Reeve, Esq.
  Office of Her Majesty’s Privy Council.
Thomas Charles Renshaw, Esq. Barrister-at-Law.
John Adey Repton, Esq. F.S.A. Springfield, Chelmsford.
Francis Riddell Reynolds, Esq. Yarmouth.
George Ambrose Rhodes, Esq. Bellair, Devon.
(c.) Edward Priest Richards, Esq. Cardiff.
John Richards, Esq. Reading.
John Richards, jun. Esq. F.S.A.
  _Local Secretary at Reading._
Charles James Richardson, Esq. F.S.A., M.I.B.A.
George Gibson Richardson, Esq.
Lawford Richardson, Esq. Blackheath.
Charles Rickards, Esq.
Samuel Rickards, Esq.
Edward Widdrington Riddell, Esq.
Edward F. Rimbault, Esq. F.S.A.
  Sec. of the Percy Society.
James Ritchie, Esq. Wrentham, Suffolk.
Rev. J. C. Roberson, Boxley, Kent.
Charles Julius Roberts, Esq. M.D.
Richard Robert Roberts, Esq.
Archibald Robertson, Esq. Surgeon R.N.
  _Local Secretary at Chatham._
J. E. P. Robertson, D.C.L. Doctors’ Commons.
John Robertson, Esq. W.S. Edinburgh.
Rev. C. W. Robinson, Prestwold, Leicestershire.
Henry Crabb Robinson, Esq. F.S.A. Barrister-at-Law.
William Robinson, Esq. LL.D. F.S.A. Barrister-at-Law.
William Robinson, Esq. Dudley.
John Roby, Esq. M.R.S.L.
Rev. Daniel Rock, D.D.
Mr. Rodwell, New Bond street.
Henry Rogers, Esq. Birmingham.
Rev. John Rogers, M.A. Canon of Exeter.
Samuel Rogers, Esq. F.R.S. F.S.A.
JOHN GAGE ROKEWOOD, Esq. F.R.S. Director S.A.
The Hon. Sir Robert Monsey Rolfe,
  one of the Barons of the Excheq.
Wm. Henry Rolfe, Esq. Sandwich.
John Romilly, Esq. M.A. Barrister-at-Law.
Rev. A. W. H. Rose, M.A. St. John’s Coll. Camb.
Sir George Rose, F.R.S.
Rev. Henry John Rose, B.D.
  Rector of Houghton Conquest, Beds.
William Henry Rosser, Esq. F.S.A.
Mayer Anselm de Rothschild, Esq. Trin. Coll. Camb.
Rev. Martin Joseph Routh, D.D.
  President of Magdalen Coll. Oxf.
James Yeeles Row, Esq.
Richard Roy, Esq.
Edward Rudge, Esq. F.R.S. F.S.A.
The Russell Institution.
James Russell, Esq. Barrister at Law.
Rev. John Fuller Russell, B.C.L.
  Minister of St. James’s, Enfield.
Rev. Thomas Russell, Walworth.
William Russell, Esq. Accountant General in Chancery.
The Right Hon. Andrew Rutherfurd.
His Grace the Duke of Rutland, K.G. D.C.L., V.P.R.S.L.

Rev. Richard J. St. Aubyn, M.A. Trin. Coll. Camb.
Richard Sainthill, Esq. Cork.
The Most Hon. the Marquess of Salisbury, D.C.L.
The Rt. Rev. the Lord Bishop of Salisbury.
Thomas Deere Salmon, Esq. Penllyne Court, Glamorgan.
Charles Sanderson, Esq. Sheffield.
William Salt, Esq.
Anthony Salvin, Esq.
Osborne Henry Sampayo, Esq.
William Sandys, Esq. F.S.A.
Wm. Devonshire Saull, Esq. F.S.A.
Mrs. Daniel E. Saunders, Gloucester.
Thomas Bush Saunders, Esq. M.A.
Thomas Saunders, Esq. F.S.A.
Thomas Field Savory, Esq. F.S.A.
Edward Scholfield, M.D. Doncaster.
Ven. Archdeacon Scott, Whitfield, Northumberland.
D. G. Scott, Esq. Ipswich.
James John Scott, Esq. Barrister-at-Law.
(c.) Rev. Robert Scott, M.A.
  Fellow of Balliol Coll. Oxford.
Edward Cator Seaton, M.D.
William Selwyn, Esq. Q.C.
Mr. Setchel.
Rev. William Sewell, M.A. Fellow of Exeter College,
  and Professor of Moral Philosophy, Oxford.
William Shackell, Esq. M.R.S.L. Hammersmith.
Right Hon. Sir Lancelot Shadwell,
  Vice-Chancellor of England, M.A.
Sir Cuthbert Sharp, Knt.
Rev. Lancelot Sharpe, M.A. Camb. F.S.A. Head Master of
  St. Saviour’s School, Southwark. _Auditor._
Sutton Sharpe, Esq. Q.C. F.S.A.
George Shaw, Esq. M.D. Leicester.
Henry Shaw, Esq. F.S.A.
Daniel Shears, Esq. jun.
Robert Shelley, Esq.
Samuel Shepherd, Esq. F.S.A.
W. H. Sheppard, Esq. Keyford House, Frome.
Mr. William Shipp, Blandford.
Evelyn Philip Shirley, Esq. M.P. M.A.
  Eatington Park, Warwicksh.
Rev. Robert St. John Shirreff, Blackheath.
Rev. Thomas Short, B.D. Fellow of Trinity Coll. Oxford.
Right Hon. the Earl of Shrewsbury, F.S.A.
---- Siemsen, Secretary of the Royal Library, Hanover.
John Augustus Francis Simpkinson, Esq. M.A., Q.C., F.S.A.
Jeremiah Simpson, Esq. Temple.
Mr. George Sims, Manchester.
Samuel Weller Singer, Esq. F.S.A.
Edward Skegg, Esq. F.R.G.S. [Died 1842.]
Edward Skegg, Esq. jun.
Alex. A. Smets, Esq. Savanna, Georgia.
Edward Smirke, Esq. M.A.
Sir Robert Smirke, R.A., F.S.A.
Sydney Smirke, Esq. F.S.A.
Alexander Smith, Esq. Edinburgh.
Benwell Smith, Esq.
Charles Roach Smith, Esq. F.S.A.
  Sec. of the Numism. Society.
Mr. George Smith.
George Frederick Smith, Esq.
George Spencer Smith, Esq.
H. Porter Smith, Esq.
John Abel Smith, Esq. M.P.
Rev. J. J. Smith, M.A. Fellow of Caius Coll. Camb.
Mr. John Russell Smith.
Newman Smith, Esq. Croydon Lodge.
Richard John Smith, Esq.
Thomas Smith, Esq. F.S.A. Birstall House, Leicester.
  _Local Secretary at Leicester._
William Smyth, Esq. M.A.
  Prof. of Modern History, Cambridge.
William Smythe, Esq. Advocate, Edinburgh.
Frederick Snaith, M.D. Holbeach.
Mr. John Snare, Reading.
Rev. Walter Sneyd, M.A. Christ Church, Oxford.
The Most Noble Edward Duke of Somerset,
  K.G., D.C.L., F.R.S.
S. Leigh Sotheby, Esq.
J. W. Southgate, Esq. Camberwell.
Rev. George Southwell, B.A. Bristol.
William Spalding, Esq. Advocate, Edinburgh.
Charles Spence, Esq. Admiralty.
Andrew Spottiswoode, Esq.
George James Squibb, Esq.
Rev. Thomas Stacey, M.A. Cardiff.
THOMAS STAPLETON, Esq. F.S.A.
Sir George Thomas Staunton, Bart. D.C.L., F.R.S., F.S.A.
(c.) Rev. William Staunton, M.A.
  Longbridge House, near Warwick.
G. Steinman Steinman, Esq. F.S.A.
Archibald John Stephens, Esq. M.A., F.R.S.
  Barrister-at-Law.
Seth William Stevenson, Esq. F.S.A.
  _Local Secretary at Norwich._
Mr. C. J. Stewart.
John Stirling, Esq. Edinburgh.
(c.) Rev. Charles William Stocker, D.D.
  St. John’s Coll. Oxford.
George Stokes, Esq. Colchester.
Henry Sewell Stokes, Esq. _Local Secretary at Truro._
Rev. Thomas Streatfeild, F.S.A. Chart’s Edge, Westerham.
Miss Agnes Strickland, Reydon Hall, Suffolk.
(c.) Rev. Joseph Stroud, M.A. Wadham College, Oxford.
John Stuart, Esq. Q.C.
Right Hon. Lord P. James Crichton Stuart.
John J. J. Sudlow, Esq.
Mr. R. Sunter, York.
Rev. Charles Sutton, D.D. Norwich.
Edward Swaine, Esq. F.S.S.
Clement Tudway Swanston, Esq. Q.C., F.S.A.
(c.) Sir John Edw. Swinburne, Bart. F.R.S., F.S.A,
  Pr. S. Ant. Newc.
Mr. John Sydenham, Fordington, Dorchester.

Rev. Edward Tagart, F.S.A.
Thomas Noon Talfourd, Esq. M.P. Serjeant-at-Law.
Michael Anne Tasburgh, Esq.
Arthur Taylor, Esq. F.S.A.
Edward Taylor, Esq. Gresham Professor of Music.
Richard Taylor, Esq. F.S.A.
Mr. John Taylor, Gower-street.
W. Benj. Sarsfield Taylor, Esq.
Mons. Techener, Paris.
John Godfrey Teed, Esq. Bencher of Gray’s Inn.
Joseph Francis Tempest, Esq. F.S.A.
Christopher Temple, Esq. Q.C.
Mons. Alexandre Teulet, Employé aux Archives.
  _Local Secretary at Paris._
Robert Thackthwaite, Esq.
Thomas Thane, Esq.
Frederick Thesiger, Esq. M.P. Q.C.
Mr. Benj. Thomas, Cheltenham.
WILLIAM J. THOMS, Esq. F.S.A. _Secretary._
Jonathan Thompson, Esq. Temple Grove, East Sheen.
Rev. W. H. Thompson, M.A.
  Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge.
Walter Thornhill, Esq.
Lt.-Gen. William Thornton. [Died 1841.]
Ven. Thomas Thorp, D.D. Archdeacon of Bristol.
Benjamin Thorpe, Esq. F.S.A.
Joseph Win Thrupp, Esq.
Rev. Mark Aloysius Tierney, F.R.S., F.S.A. Arundel.
Right Hon. Sir Nicholas Conyngham Tindal,
  Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, M.A.
(c.) William Tite, Esq. F.R.S., F.S.A.,
  Hon. Sec. of the London Institution.
The Ven. Henry John Todd, M.A.
  Archdeacon of Cleveland, F.S.A.
(c.) Rev. James Henthorn Todd, D.D., M.R.I.A.,
  Fellow of Trinity Coll.
Dublin, Sec. Irish Archæol. Soc.
F. G. Tomlins, Esq.
William Tooke, Esq. F.R.S., M.R.S.L.,
  Vice-Pres. of the Soc. of Arts,
  Treas. of Roy. Soc. Lit. and the Lit. Fund Soc.
Charles Towneley, Esq. F.S.A.
John Towneley, Esq.
R. E. A. Townsend, Esq. Doctors’ Commons.
(c.) Rev. J. Montgomery Traherne, M.A., F.R.S., F.S.A.
Walter Calverley Trevelyan, Esq. F.S.A.
  Newc., Wallington, Northumberland.
William Edward Trotter, Esq.
W. J. A. Tucker, Esq.
Charles A. Tulk, Esq.
Thomas Turnbull, Esq.
William B. D. D. Turnbull, Esq. F.S.A. Sc.
  _Local Secretary at Edinburgh._
Alfred Turner, Esq.
Dawson Turner, Esq. F.R.S., F.S.A. Great Yarmouth.
Francis Turner, Esq. Barrister-at-Law.
Rev. George T. Turner.
Robert S. Turner, Esq.
Rev. Samuel Blois Turner, Halesworth, Suffolk.
Gen. Sir T. Hilgrove Turner,
  G.C.H., K.S.A., K.C., F.S.A.
Rev. Charles Turnor, B.A., F.S.A., F.R.A.S.
Travers Twiss, Esq. B.C.L., F.R.S.,
  Fellow of University College, Oxford.
William Twopeny, Esq. Barrister-at-Law, Temple.
Mr. Samuel Tymms, Bury St. Edmund’s.
(c.) Edward Tyrrell, Esq.
  City Remembrancer, Guildhall.
William Tyson, Esq. F.S.A. Bristol.
(c.) J. R. D. Tyssen, Esq. F.S.A. Hackney.

Adam Urquhart, Esq. Advocate.
Edward Vernon Utterson, Esq. F.S.A.

M. Aart Veder, Rotterdam.
William Vines, Esq. F.S.A.
Gabriel Vrignon, Esq.

Mr. Charles Waine, Blandford.
Reader Wainewright, Esq. Barrister-at-Law, F.S.A.
Daniel Wakefield, Esq. Q.C.
Francis Pearson Walesby, Esq. B.C.L.
  Barrister-at-Law, and late Professor
  of Anglo-Saxon in the Univ. of Oxford.
Arthur Walford, Esq. Hammersmith.
Thomas Walford, Esq.
D. M. Walker, Esq. Gloucester.
John Walker, Esq. Cornhill, Northumberland.
Rev. Henry Wall, M.A.,
  Vice-Principal of St. Alban Hall, Oxford.
Lionel A. B. Waller, Esq.
Thomas George Waller, Esq.
William Elyard Walmisley, Esq.
James Walsh, Esq. F.S.A.
Henry Walter, Esq. The Willows, Windsor.
Rev. Jonathan Walton, D.D. Rector of Birdbrook, Essex.
William Wansey, Esq. F.S.A.
John Ward, Esq. Durham.
Rev. Charles Ward, M.A. Rector of Maulden, Beds.
Rev. Charles Warren, M.A.
  Librarian of Trinity College, Camb.
Edward Warren, Esq.
John Warwick, Esq. Maidstone.
Rev. John Watson, M.A. Brasenose College, Oxford.
ALBERT WAY, Esq. M.A., F.S.A.
Thomas William Weare, Esq. B.A.,
  Student of Christ Church, Oxf.
Rev. John Webb, M.A., F.S.A., M.R.S.L.,
  Tretire, Herefordshire.
Montagu Webster, Esq. Pen’s House, near Birmingham.
Hugh Weightman, Esq. B.A.
Mr. Richard Welch, Reading.
John Weld, Esq.
Rev. Charles Wellbeloved. _Local Secretary at York._
---- Werlauff,
  Chief Librarian of the Royal Library, Copenhagen.
Miss Westcar, Tewkesbury.
Sir Richard Westmacott, R.A., F.S.A.
His Excellency M. Van de Weyer, Belgian Minister.
John Welchman Whateley, Esq. Birmingham.
William Whateley, Esq. Q.C.
James Whatman, Esq. Vinters, near Maidstone.
Rev. William Whewell, M.A., F.R.S. F.S.A.,
  Fellow and Tutor of Trinity College, Camb.
Gordon Whitbread, Esq. M.A.
Anthony White, Esq.
Harry White, Esq. Halesworth, Suffolk.
Horace Philips White, Esq. Winchester.
Rev. Robert Meadows White, B.D.
  Professor of Anglo-Saxon, Oxf.
Wm. Archibald Armstrong White, Esq. F.R.S., F.S.A.
Mr. H. A. Whitehead, Gloucester.
Francis Whitmarsh, Esq. Q.C.
Rev. Ainslie Henry Whitmore,
  Rector of Leasingham, near Sleaford.
  _Local Secretary._
W. Lechmere Whitmore, Esq. F.S.A. Prior’s Bank, Fulham.
George Byrom Whittaker, Esq.
Rev. Sidney H. Widdrington, M.A. Rector of Walcot, Bath.
Right Hon. Sir James Wigram, Vice-Chancellor,
  M.A. F.R.S. F.S.A.
Thomas Willement, Esq. F.S.A.
Philip Williams, Esq. Q.C. Lincoln’s Inn.
Charles M. Willich, Esq.
Horace Hayman Wilson, Esq. M.A.
  Professor of Sanscrit, Oxford,
  and Pres. of the Numism. Society.
(c.) Rev. John Wilson, B.D.
  Fellow of Trin. Coll. Oxford.
Sir Giffin Wilson, F.R.S. Master in Chancery.
Joshua Wilson, Esq.
(c.) Lea Wilson, Esq. F.S.A.
(c.) Lestock Peach Wilson, Esq.
Walter Wilson, Esq. Bath.
John Wimbridge, Esq.
Benjamin Godfrey Windus, Esq.
Thomas Windus, Esq. F.S.A.
Charles Wingfield, Esq. Oxford.
William Wingfield, Esq. Master in Chancery.
Charles Winn, Esq. Nostel Priory.
Thomas Winstanley, Esq. Liverpool.
Rev. Robert Wintle, B.D. Culham, Oxfordshire.
Rev. Thomas Wintle, B.D.
  Fellow of St. John’s College, Oxford.
David Williams Wire, Esq.
Henry Wise, Esq. Huntley Cottage, Camberwell.
Mr. Lewis Wise.
Mr. John Wodderspoon, Ipswich.
Herr Ferdinand Wolf, For. Memb. S.A.
  Sec. Imp. Library at Vienna.
  _Local Secretary at Vienna._
The Ducal Library, Wolfenbuttel.
Sir Francis Lindley Wood, Bart.
  Hickleton Hall, Yorkshire.
George Woodfall, Esq. F.S.A.
Henry Woodthorpe, Esq. LL.D., F.S.A.
  Town Clerk of London.
  [Died March 3, 1842.]
Rev. Christopher Wordsworth, D.D.
  Master of Trinity College, Camb.
William Wordsworth, Esq.
Francis Worship, Esq.
Rev. Thomas Worsley, M.A.
  Master of Downing College, Camb.
The Ven. Francis Wrangham, M.A., F.R.S.
  Archdeacon of the East Riding of York.
Rev. John Reynell Wreford, F.S.A.
  _Local Secretary at Bristol._
William Ellicombe Wreford, Esq. Bristol.
John Francis Wright, Esq.
Rev. Godfrey Wright, Bilham House, Yorkshire.
THOMAS WRIGHT, Esq. M.A., F.S.A.
William T. Wright, Esq. H.M. Dockyard, Chatham.
Wm. Battie Wrightson, Esq. M.P.
The Library of the Writers of the Signet, Edinburgh.
Rt. Hon. Charles Watkin Williams Wynn, F.R.S., F.S.A.
(c.) Wadham Wyndham, Esq. M.P.
Rev. Philip Wynter, D.D.
  President of St. John’s College, Oxford.

Rev. Samuel Wildman Yates, M.A.
Henry Galgacus Redhead Yorke, Esq.
Thomas Young, Esq.


London: Printed by J. B. Nichols and Son, 25, Parliament Street.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *

Greek Transliteration:

The Greek script in John Dee’s diary is a letter-for-letter
substitution, not a phonetic rendering.

  α β γ δ ε η
  a b g d e ê (long e, only in true Greek)

  θ  ι     κ
  th i,j,y k,c (sometimes also used for sh)

  λ μ ν ξ ο π ρ σ/ς
  l m n x o p r s (the second form is used at the end of words)

  τ υ
  t u,v,w (sometimes, but not consistently, doubled υυ for w)

  φ    χ  ω
  f,ph ch ô (long o, only in one Latinized word)

Initial “h” is shown as in true Greek, by placing a “rough breathing”
mark over the following vowel or diphthong-- ἁδ = “had”-- but this is
often omitted. Note the spellings -νκ-, -νγ- (for -nk-, -ng-) where
true Greek would use -γκ-, -γγ-.


Errors and Anomalies:

June 19th, Barnabas Saul came to see me at Mortlak:
  _apparent error for “July”_
μουνσιευρἱς στατε
  _may be meant for two words: μουνσιευρ ἱς στατε_
Mr. Thomas Sowthwell ryd to Prag / ward from Trebon
  _usually spelled ‘Prage’, but usage of ‘ward’ occurs elsewhere_
cira occasum solis paulo ante
  _error for “circa”?_
I moved the matter of Xyd
  _name also appears in the Index with this spelling: misreading of
  “Kyd”?_

37. Expositio theoricarum.-- ...
42. Tractatuli tres ...
165. Avicenna de naturalibus.-- ...
  _description of MSS missing from these three catalog entries_
Ejusdem expositio super diversa opuscula Aristotelis phisicorum.
  _text reads “Aristolelis”_
Petri de Sancto Audomaro et Joh. de Lineriis
  _text reads “et et”_
Tabula ad sciendum quis planeta dominetur
  _text reads “planetadominetur” without space_


Punctuation
  _missing punctuation in the Index and Catalog has been silently
  supplied_

Expositorius Rogeri Bachonis.--
  _text has unneeded close quote ” at end of title_
Albertus de divinatione. De spiritu et inspiratione.--
  _no dash -- between these two titles at page break_
Una cum aliis tractatibus variarum quæstionum,--
  _so in original, followed by MS description_






End of Project Gutenberg's The Private Diary of Dr. John Dee, by John Dee

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PRIVATE DIARY OF DR. JOHN DEE ***

***** This file should be named 19553-0.txt or 19553-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/9/5/5/19553/

Produced by Louise Hope, David Starner and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
